SUMMARY

Melinda Sordino begins her freshman year at Merryweather High School in Syracuse, New York, with a heavy secret weighing on her. Over the summer, she and her friends went to a party and Melinda ended up calling the police, causing her friends and everyone at the party to socially reject her. Melinda's only friend is Heather, a new student, who tries to get Melinda involved in her schemes to gain popularity.

Melinda, however, is not interested in gaining popularity and spends much of her time in an abandoned janitor's closet at school. She has stolen some late passes, so she uses the closet as a hideout to avoid teachers she dislikes and painful interactions with her former friends. Her only solace at school is art class, where she is working on a year-long project to create various interpretations of a tree. In the school hallways, she occasionally sees IT, a name she has given to senior Andy Evans, and she slowly begins to face what he did to her. Whenever he sees her, he antagonizes her in ways that make her relive her initial experience with him. She grows more despondent and even ditches whole days of school. Her parents and guidance counselor try to get her to open up about her poor academic performance, but Melinda refuses to speak to them. However, over many months of painful silence and self-harm in the form of lip- and nail-biting, Melinda finally admits to herself that Andy Evans raped her at the party last summer.

After facing the fact that she was raped, Melinda begins to recover from the trauma of the event. She is worried about Andy Evans' intentions for her former best friend, Rachel, and finally tells Rachel what happened to her. While Rachel does not believe Melinda, Melinda begins to feel free after speaking up. She takes up new hobbies, like yard work, and gains confidence in her attempts at creating a vibrant tree for art class. She no longer relies on Heather's false friendship and begins to reconnect with her former friend Ivy. As the school year comes to an end, Melinda is forced to confront Andy once again when he corners her in her janitor's closet. She defends herself and gains the respect of the school as many other girls have also suffered Andy's attacks silently. She ends the year by finishing her tree and sharing what has happened to her with her art teacher, Mr. Freeman.

CHARACTER LIST AND ANALYSIS

MELINDA SORDINO

Melinda, a high school freshman, is the protagonist in Laurie Halse Anderson's Speak. The summer before starting high school, she was raped by a senior student, Andy Evans. Due to her trauma and inability to tell anyone about what happened, Melinda spirals into a dark depression; loses her ability to speak with ease; and can express her pain only through physical acts, such as biting her lips and nails. Melinda's introspection and dedication to her art allow her to grow and eventually see herself as a survivor rather than a victim. She learns that the only way to counter evil is to speak out against it.

ANDY EVANS

Andy Evans is the antagonist in Speak. He is a narcissistic senior in high school who is used to getting his way, either through charm or by force. After raping Melinda at a summer party, he continues to antagonize her throughout the novel, showing his inability to empathize with others. He has sexually assaulted other girls at school. Eventually, he gets what he deserves when Melinda defends herself against a second attack and he gets caught.

HEATHER

A new girl from out of town, Heather is the opposite of Melinda in many ways. Unlike Melinda, Heather does not accept her role as outcast and does her best to win popularity by ingratiating herself with various groups at school. She is self-centered and unable to see that she uses Melinda (the same way Melinda uses Heather) to avoid facing the fact that they're both friendless. Heather fails to grow, however, and while Melinda is able to reconnect and create genuine friendships, Heather continues to try to win people's favor through superficial means.

MR. FREEMAN

Melinda's art teacher, he serves as a role model for her on how to use art to express and deal with difficult emotions.

RACHEL/RACHELLE

Melinda's former best friend; her relationship with Andy Evans spurs Melinda to speak up.

DAVID PETRAKIS

Melinda's lab partner; he speaks up against Mr. Neck's poor behavior as a teacher and thus serves as both a role model and friend for Melinda.

IVY

One of Melinda's former friends, Ivy reconnects with her through art and their shared distaste for Andy Evans.

MR. NECK

Melinda's history teacher, he abuses his authority in the classroom to push his own ideas until David Petrakis stands up to him.

MOM

Melinda's mother, she works extra-long hours in a clothing store and is always stressed and exhausted.

DAD

Melinda's father, he has a less demanding job than her mom and is not always as helpful around the house as he could be.

PRINCIPAL PRINCIPAL

Melinda's nickname for her inept principal, he is unable to understand her situation or adequately discipline other students.

HAIRWOMAN

Melinda's nickname for her English teacher, she tries her best to get her students engaged with literature and writing.

SUMMARY FIRST MARKING PERIOD, WELCOME TO MERRYWEATHER HIGH - "SANCTUARY"

It is Melinda's first day of high school and she is dreading it. She gets on the bus and sits in the middle, not wanting to be lumped with the "losers" at the back of the bus or the little kids at the front. By the time the bus pulls into her school, however, she is still sitting alone.

All of the ninth graders are corralled into the auditorium for an introduction to high school life. Melinda sits alone, noticing and annoyed by the various cliques forming around her. She spies her former close friends — Nicole, Ivy, and Rachel — joining new groups, leaving her alone. The only person who speaks to her is Heather, a girl from Ohio and with a mouth full of braces. A teacher who Melinda labels "Mr. Neck" gives a presentation to the ninth graders on what to expect; Melinda expects high school to be horrible.

She does, however, find one bright spot in her day: art class. Her art teacher, Mr. Freeman, is an effusive, soulful teacher who encourages creativity and emotion in his students. He has each student pull a scrap of paper out of a broken globe; written on each scrap is a word that the student will try to create in art for the rest of the semester. Melinda pulls the word tree.

ANALYSIS FIRST MARKING PERIOD, WELCOME TO MERRYWEATHER HIGH - "SANCTUARY"

In these first sections of Speak, you meet Melinda, and through her description of her classmates and teachers, you gain a sense of their character as well as her own. You also see hints as to what has caused Melinda to be isolated and view herself as an "outcast."

First, Melinda presents herself as a thoughtful, sarcastic, and reserved person. While she formerly saw herself as a "Plain Jane" with her small group of friends, she now sees herself as "Outcast," friend of no one. The calm Melinda describes on reaching art class suggests that art will continue to be an outlet for her as she wrestles with the breach between her and her friends and her new life as a high school student.

Secondly, Melinda's description of her peers and teachers not only reveals her wit and sarcasm, but also illustrates the theme of control with which Melinda will struggle throughout the novel. Pay close attention to the names of the people around Melinda and whether or not she gives them nicknames. For instance, by calling her social studies teacher "Mr. Neck" and her English teacher "Hairwoman," Melinda is able to distance herself from these teachers who annoy her or see her as a nuisance. In contrast, Melinda does not give her art teacher Mr. Freeman a name; his name already connotes her feelings toward him. Already Melinda sees art class as "free" space, a sanctuary from the rest of her life, and Mr. Freeman nurtures that feeling in her. The ability to name and the use of names will continue to play a significant role in the novel.

Finally, while Melinda has yet to reveal why she is friendless, these first sections provide initial clues. For instance, when Melinda is sitting in the auditorium the first day of school, she spots her former best friend Rachel, who she is "dying to tell what really happened." Here, you see that her friends and peers have a misconception about Melinda that has caused them to ostracize her. While the nature of these events remains unclear, you understand that Melinda is unwilling and unable to talk about it — even if it would make her social life easier.

SUMMARY FIRST MARKING PERIOD, HEATHERING - "DEVILS DESTROY"

Melinda takes the bus to Heather's house and they hang out, eating popcorn and watching television. Heather is determined to worm her way into popularity and tries to get Melinda to participate in her plans by making goals for the year. Melinda dismisses Heather's plans and is only interested in going home and taking a nap, though part of her admires Heather's normalcy.

At school, Hairwoman makes Melinda spend study hall in her classroom making up English homework and Melinda arrives late to study hall, clearly upset. A librarian helps her out by writing her a late pass. Later that day, after avoiding Mr. Neck in the lunchroom, Melinda flees to the Senior's Wing where she finds an abandoned janitor's closet. It has shelves, an old chair and desk, and clearly has not been used for years. She decides it is the perfect place for her, so she steals some late passes from Hairwoman for future use.

Melinda plans to tidy up her janitor's closet instead of going to a pep rally one day, but Heather snags her before she can escape. At the pep rally, Heather has them sit by her friends on the school newspaper and before long, a girl recognizes Melinda. The girl asks Melinda if she is the one who called the police at a party over the summer, and Melinda is unable to explain why she had to do so. The students around Melinda become silent and hostile, and not even Heather sticks up for her.

ANALYSIS FIRST MARKING PERIOD, HEATHERING - "DEVILS DESTROY"

In these sections, you learn more about Heather and Melinda's relationship, Melinda's quest for peace, and more allusions to the troubling event that has changed Melinda's life.

First, Melinda and Heather's interactions reveal that they are using each other for different reasons. Heather, as a new student, has latched on to Melinda as a means to achieving the social life of her dreams — one filled with popularity and friends. For Melinda, Heather is a distraction from her own life as she shares none of Heather's enthusiasm or goals.

Melinda finds another sanctuary in her discovery of the abandoned janitor's closet. She likes that it "has no purpose, no name," allowing her to use it avoid both herself and social interactions. Her discovery, coupled with her other attempts to escape contact (for example, her desire to take a nap rather than hang out with Heather) suggests that not only have her friends ostracized her, but that she also seeks isolation as a means to avoid dealing with issues in her life.

Those issues become clearer from more hints about what happened over the summer. These sections reveal not only that Melinda called the police to come out and break up a teenager's party, but also that no one knows the real reason why she did so. In Melinda's inability to defend herself against the girl's bullying, you see that Melinda is also unable to deal with what happened to her and labels her discomfort as an "animal noise" in her stomach. By employing this metaphor, Melinda avoids naming the problem, much as she avoids honest interaction with her teachers by nicknaming them. Thus, the theme of naming expands; it is not only a means of control for Melinda, but also a means to avoid thinking about what happened to her.

SUMMARY FIRST MARKING PERIOD, CHEERLEADERS - "ACTING"

At the pep rally, Melinda lists the names of the cheerleaders, giving some of them the names of Santa's reindeer, to ridicule them. She can't believe they can be seen as innocent and perky at the pep rally one day and the next day go to parties, get drunk, and have sex, while still maintaining the respect of their teachers and parents. As the rally ends, Melinda gets pushed down the bleachers.

In art class, Melinda struggles with forming her tree. She paints trees struck by lightning and half-dead trees, but is dissatisfied with her creations. Mr. Freeman continues to encourage her to use her emotions to guide her work.

On Columbus Day, Melinda goes to Heather's house because they have the day off from school. Melinda is jealous of Heather's room, how in its neatness it totally expresses Heather's personality whereas her own room doesn't express anything about her. As Heather whines about her lack of a social life and how at her old school she was involved in all sorts of school activities, she spills nail polish across her new carpet. Melinda tries to clean it up, then, tired of Heather's complaints, goes home without saying goodbye.

ANALYSIS FIRST MARKING PERIOD, CHEERLEADERS - "ACTING"

Melinda reveals her depression through her commentary on the cheerleaders; the metaphor of the trees she works on in art class; and by her feeling that she is always acting, as illustrated by her visit to Heather's house. First, Melinda uses naming to show how two-faced the cheerleaders are, expressing not only her distaste for what they represent, but also her desire to exert control on her experience of high school. First, by naming some of the cheerleaders after Santa's reindeer (Donner and Blitzen), Melinda mocks the cheerleaders and the myth about high school they represent — that it is a time of joy, vitality, and exuberance, which high school is definitely not for Melinda. By ridiculing the cheerleaders, Melinda is able to distance herself from them as well as dismantle the myth they represent — they are just as unreal as Santa's reindeer.

Secondly, Melinda's artwork is a metaphor for her inner turmoil. In many ways, the trees Melinda creates represent her sense of herself; and as the trees change throughout the novel, they mirror her inner transformations. For instance, at this point in Melinda's story, she feels dead inside, barely surviving, as represented by the half-dead trees she draws. Like her lightning-struck trees, she too has suffered a profound physical and emotional blow and is unable to face it and thus unable to heal.

Finally, Melinda has lost her sense of self, so she always feels as if she is putting on a performance when interacting with others. This is most clearly shown in these sections by her visit to Heather's house. Melinda sees Heather's bedroom as a perfect expression of Heather's personality — bland, neat, trying desperately to fit a certain image. Melinda's room doesn't express anything about herself, and Melinda is unable to come up with a plan to redecorate. Thus, her room symbolizes Melinda's relationship with herself — she does not know who she is, or who she is becoming.

SUMMARY FIRST MARKING PERIOD, DINNER THEATER - "HALLOWEEN"

Melinda's parents receive an update on her grades and confront her about her poor performance at dinner one night. Melinda is impervious to their comments and retreats to her room.

At school, Melinda finds biology tolerable as she has an ally of sorts in her lab partner, David Petrakis, a super-smart and polite nerd. In algebra, however, she struggles; while once she excelled at math, she doesn't see the practical application of algebra — and her grades reflect her lack of motivation and understanding. One day her algebra teacher, Mr. Stetman, sends her to the board, along with her ex-best friend Rachel. Melinda's terrified of how Rachel will try to humiliate her at the board, and chews on her lips in an attempt to devour herself and vanish.

On Halloween, Melinda's parents tell her she is too old for trick-or-treating, which Melinda is relieved to hear, because no one has asked her to do anything for Halloween. She recalls last year when she and her friends dressed as witches and haunted the town, feeling powerful. Melinda tries not to feel sorry for herself and spends the evening with a copy of Dracula and some candy corn.

ANALYSIS FIRST MARKING PERIOD, DINNER THEATER - "HALLOWEEN"

Melinda's interaction with her parents, her severe lip-biting, and her memories of last year's Halloween exemplify how much Melinda has lost through the trauma she survived over the summer. First, through Melinda's parents' dialogue you gain a better view of how much Melinda has changed. By referring to Melinda's past test performance, you see that Melinda used to do well in school and that her apathy toward her grades is a new development. However, Melinda, used to her parents' yelling, ignores their demands.

Additionally, when Melinda bites her lip when forced to work with Rachel in algebra, you see that her lip-biting is an ongoing motif signifying not only her silence, but also her desire to vanish. She is not only biting her lips as a metaphorical way to keep quiet about what happened to her, but also as a way to express her desire to "swallow myself." Readers should watch how this motif continues to evolve as Melinda's relationship to herself and her self-imposed silence change.

Finally, through Melinda's memory of last year's Halloween, you see how Melinda used to see herself. When she and her friends dressed up as witches, Melinda truly felt herself as part of a coven, a group of young women empowered by their connection to one another. Thus, you see just how complex Melinda's sense of loss is: Not only has the yet-to-be-named trauma she has experienced made her feel alone and vulnerable, but that loneliness and vulnerability has been compounded by being ostracized by her friends — she feels she has no one on whom to depend.

SUMMARY FIRST MARKING PERIOD, NAME NAME NAME - "NIGHTMARE"

Once again, Merryweather High changes its mascot. This time the school switches from the Devils to the Tigers, which has the Ecology Club in a frenzy. The Eco Club suggests that the new name is demeaning to an endangered species. In Spanish class, the class learns that linda means pretty, so Melinda's classmates start calling her Me-no-linda, adding to her sense of isolation.

Heather, on the other hand, is working hard to feel less isolated and has been accepted into a clique, "The Marthas," on a trial basis. The Marthas are preppy girls who spend their time doing volunteer work. They make Heather decorate the faculty lounge by herself and Heather begs Melinda to help her. When The Marthas arrive to judge Heather's work, Melinda slips out and overhears The Marthas call her creepy. She runs away to the bathroom and tries to wash her face and her entire self down the drain.

Then, one day, Melinda sees IT in the hallway. He winks and smiles at her. She wants to throw up.

ANALYSIS FIRST MARKING PERIOD, NAME NAME NAME - "NIGHTMARE"

In these sections the theme of naming recurs through the school's ever-changing mascot, Melinda's experience in Spanish class, and her first sighting of IT. First, through the school's fluctuating identity, Anderson offers commentary on the problem of naming. Like Melinda, the school can not settle on what it is supposed to be; unlike Melinda's problems, however, the school's problems offer comic relief, exposing the arguments over mascots as silly and entirely separate from real students' real experiences of high school. What does it matter what the school is called if it is a place where students like Melinda suffer daily ridicule and exclusion?

Naming appears to be problem again, this time in Melinda's Spanish class. Linda means pretty in Spanish, but classmates come up with a new taunt: Me-no-linda. Through her classmates' manipulation of her name, Melinda suffers another loss of control. She loses even more control over her identity; now, not only is she unsure of herself, but others are using her name as a weapon against her. Thus, Anderson shows us how both naming and being named has influence. Just as Melinda uses her nicknaming habit to exert control over others in her life, she is subject to others' power to nickname her, as well.

Finally, there is yet another student to whom Melinda has given a nickname: IT. Anderson doesn't reveal who IT is, but Melinda's visceral revulsion upon seeing him suggests that he was the cause of her pain over the summer. By calling him IT and not by his name, Melinda shows that she is still unable to name what happened to her, let alone the person who hurt her. Through the various ways names are employed or manipulated, Anderson adds to the theme of naming, showing that both what people give names to and what people avoid naming can have power.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, GO______ (FILL IN THE BLANK)! - "JOB DAY"

The Ecology Club's campaign against having a tiger as the school mascot succeeds, and the school holds an assembly to come up with new suggestions. The students vote on one of four options.

Melinda's parents are making her stay after school to get extra help from her teachers because her grades are so bad. Melinda, however, uses the time after school to tidy up and decorate her janitor's closet with a poster of Maya Angelou. Increasingly, Melinda is finding it difficult to speak; in addition to her sore and bitten lips, her throat constantly hurts.

In Spanish class, her teacher instructs the class to translate and conjugate five verbs. Melinda chooses traducir, fracasar, esconder, escaper, olvidar.

On Job Day, Melinda and the rest of her classmates take a test to see what field they should go into. Melinda's test indicates she should go into forestry, firefighting, communications, or mortuary science. Heather's test indicates she should be a nurse. Heather is thrilled by this news and begins to plan her first steps toward achieving this goal. Melinda cannot fathom planning out the next ten years of her life, let alone plan beyond surviving ninth grade.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, GO______ (FILL IN THE BLANK)! - "JOB DAY"

Several repeating images in these sections illustrate Melinda's despair as does a comparison and contrast between her and Heather. First, Melinda's sore throat, when combined with her habit of biting her lips, shows that her internal turmoil and stress is expressing itself physically. By providing Melinda with physical indicators of her mental state, Anderson is able to support one of the novel's major themes: Silence is not a solution to a problem.

Secondly, Melinda's repeated description of her secret as being an animal or beast lodged in her gut suggests that she feels preyed upon by her silence. By turning her secret into an animal prowling around inside her, Melinda distances herself from the secret and relinquishes control over it. The secret is its own creature, and thus she is not responsible for dealing with it. This avoidance is also shown in the Spanish words she chooses to conjugate: She avoids school work and thus is at risk of failing (fracasar), and all shSummary and Analysis Second Marking Period, First Amendment"-"Wishbone""e wants to do is hide (esconder), and forget (olvidar) what happened.

Finally, Heather serves as a significant character to whom Melinda can be compared and contrasted. While both Heather and Melinda suffer from being social outcasts, Heather is continually trying to rectify the situation whereas Melinda simply tries to ignore the pain it causes her. Also, Heather and Melinda contrast in the ways they deal with their futures. Heather embraces the Job Day test results, which indicate she should be a nurse, because she longs for a sense of purpose and belonging and will accept anything that helps her achieve these goals. Melinda, however, is more complex. Not only does the test indicate a wide variety of potential careers she could pursue, she feels no deep affinity with any of them, unable to see beyond her current state of despair and depression.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, FIRST AMENDMENT - "WISHBONE"

Mr. Neck storms into history class one day and begins a debate on immigration because he feels his son is unable to get a job because of immigrants. As more students chime in, Mr. Neck sees that they do not agree with his premise that the United States should have closed its borders in 1900, and he shuts down the debate. David Petrakis stands up and challenges him, saying it is un-American to end the debate just because Mr. Neck doesn't like what he hears. Mr. Neck tells David to sit down or go to the principal's office, and David calmly leaves the classroom. Melinda admires David's bravery and makes a point of paying more attention to him.

Thanksgiving rolls around, and Melinda's mother is anxious and tense from the pressure she puts on herself and her clothing store to turn on a profit on Black Friday. Mom's stress causes her to forget to thaw the turkey, so she spends Thanksgiving morning boiling it before capitulating to work demands. She heads into the store for the day. Melinda's dad tries to hack the turkey into pieces in order to cook it quicker, but he ends up making a repulsive stew. Melinda and her dad order delivery-pizza for their dinner instead.

Melinda rescues the turkey bone from the trash and brings it into art class. Mr. Freeman encourages her creative experiment, and Melinda ends up gluing the turkey bones to a block of wood and putting a Barbie doll head with its mouth taped shut inside of the bones. Mr. Freeman provides Melinda some commentary on her piece but she leaves the class before he can ask her any questions about it.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, FIRST AMENDMENT - "WISHBONE"

In these sections, Melinda finds a role model in David Petrakis, reveals more of her family problems, and takes a step closer to speaking up about her life through her artwork. Melinda's use of nicknames, her sarcastic tone, and her isolation suggest there are few people in her life she trusts let alone feels she can look up to or confide in. Thus, David's ability to stand up to Mr. Neck is a breath of fresh air for Melinda. Not only does she see in him a peer who is able to do the right thing, but through his example is able to start thinking about who she wants to become: someone who remains silent in the face of injustice or someone like David who chooses to speak up?

You also see how Melinda's family dynamics influence her decision to remain silent about her trauma. Both Melinda's parents have trouble connecting with her. For instance, both parents say very little to her over the course of Thanksgiving day except for instructions on how to help with dinner (Mom asks Melinda to peel potatoes; Dad asks Melinda to order pizza). Additionally, neither parent is warm to the other. These tense family dynamics contribute to Melinda's decision to remain silent because she does not feel particularly close to her parents.

Melinda, however, is able to channel the ruined Thanksgiving into her artwork by salvaging the turkey bones. The artwork she creates thus becomes a metaphor for her current situation. By placing a Barbie doll head inside the turkey's bones, Melinda creates a representation of her emotional state: She feels trapped inside her mind and unable to escape. Furthermore, by taping the doll's mouth shut, Melinda creates a metaphor for her own silence; she too, feels as if her mouth is taped shut and that she has no control over her silence. It is almost as if her silence controls her.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, WINTER BREAK - "HARD LABOR"

Two days before Christmas, Melinda digs the Christmas tree out of the garage, dusts it off, and sets it up. She thinks that Christmas needs little kids around to add to the festive spirit. Now, she feels that she and her parents are just going through the motions of celebrating the holiday and that her parents would be divorced if she hadn't been born. Melinda goes outside and makes a snow angel, recalling a time when she was a young child and her parents were happier with their work lives and with each other.

On Christmas day, Melinda's parents give her some charcoal pencils and a sketch pad because they had noticed her interest in drawing. Melinda is touched by the fact that they actually noticed something about her and almost tells them about being attacked. The night of the party last summer, Melinda came home late instead of spending the night with friends. Neither of her parents was home — her mother got in around two in the morning, and her father arrived around dawn. Melinda does not know how to tell them about that night without also addressing their own whereabouts.

After a couple of days of winter break, Melinda's parents decide she is not going to sit around the house. One day she accompanies her mom to work. After folding a few shirts, she slacks off the rest of the day thus winning the approval of her mom's employees (who thought Melinda would spy on them for her mom). By the end of the day, however, Melinda sees how hard her mom works and begins to feel guilty for her laziness.

The next day she goes to work with her dad, who sells insurance. He works in a fancy office and is able to order out for lunch every day. Melinda resents how easy her dad has it when her mom works so hard. While stuffing calendars into envelopes, Melinda cuts her tongue, causing her to bleed on some calendars, which upsets her father.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, WINTER BREAK - "HARD LABOR"

During Melinda's winter break, you see how her family dynamics affect her decision to remain silent and how her parents' work life influences her perception of them. As Melinda slowly reveals more about the events that took place the night of the summer party, her reasons for remaining silent become more apparent: She was attacked by IT, and the attack prompted her to call the police who made some arrests. She loses her friends and becomes a social pariah at school because of that phone call. Now, an additional bit of information comes to light: She came home that evening to find each of her parents out late and at different locations. Thus, in addition to not wanting to deal with the pain of the attack from that evening, Melinda hesitates to talk to her parents because it will ruin the illusion they work so hard to create: the illusion that they are still the happy, functional family they once were.

Melinda gains a better understanding of her parents through her experience of joining them at work. By spending a day at her mom's workplace, Melinda understands how much pressure her mom is under and how alone she is in trying to meet the demands she faces. For instance, not only does Melinda slack off the entire day, so do her mom's regular employees, causing her mom to stay several hours late after the shop closes. In contrast, Melinda's dad is able to put his feet up and joke around with his coworkers and clients. Melinda resents how easy her dad has it compared to her mom — not only because his work day is easier, but because of how little he does to support his wife when he is not at work.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, FOUL - "POSTER CHILD"

Now that winter has settled over Syracuse, gym class is held inside. The first day of indoor gym focuses on basketball. When Melinda approaches the foul line, she is able to make over forty shots in a row, earning the respect of her gym teacher, Ms. Connors. Ms. Connors immediately wants to recruit her for the basketball team and is horribly disappointed that Melinda's grade point average is far below the minimum requirement. The boys' basketball team takes the floor and after Brendan Keller, the boy Melinda nicknames Basketball Pole takes a few bad shots, Ms. Connors has Melinda show the boys how to shoot. She tells Melinda that if she works with Brendan after school, she can earn an A in gym class. Melinda remains silent, unable to say no, but determined to not show up to shooting practice.

Melinda continues to love art class. Mr. Freeman has become a popular teacher due to his laissez-faire approach to teaching and his willingness to embrace his students' creativity. Melinda is still working on creating her tree, though she is unable to translate the image she has in her head into a work of art.

Heather asks Melinda to come over after school one day and whines about how the Marthas aren't being nice to her. They want her to make all the posters for a canned food drive and Heather convinces Melinda to make the posters because she is better at art. Melinda agrees, because once again, she is unable to say no.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, FOUL - "POSTER CHILD"

In these three sections, Melinda is recognized for her talents and sees another role model in Mr. Freeman. To begin, Melinda receives recognition for her outstanding foul shot and her artistic ability in these sections. These moments show that while Melinda doubts everything about herself, others see the potential in her. While Melinda refuses to help out the boys basketball team, she does agree to draw posters with Heather, albeit reluctantly. By accepting Heather's offer to make her artwork public, Melinda begins moving away from trying to remain invisible and silent to beginning to find a way to express herself.

Secondly, much like David Petrakis, Mr. Freeman represents the type of person Melinda would like to be. She admires him for his teaching style (he kicks lazy kids out of class, but allows students to eat and drink as long as they are productive) and for his own painting-in-progress that ridicules the school board. Through Mr. Freeman, Melinda sees art as a way to speak out about issues and finds this idea invigorating, going so far as to suggest that she would like to be an artist someday.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, DEAD FROGS - "NAMING THE MONSTER"

Frog dissection begins in biology. Melinda is in charge of making the first slice down the frog's abdomen and as she does so, she has a flashback to the night of her attack, causing her to faint.

Heather's latest attempt to gain popularity is to become a model. She begs Melinda to come with her to the first photo shoot. The location is chilly and Melinda shivers in her jacket and sweater and thinks Heather looks pitiful and skinny modeling a bikini.

In algebra class, Mr. Stetman continues to try to get his students interested in algebra by coming up with practical applications. He suggests using algebra to calculate how many guppies to breed for a guppy business. In English class, Hairwoman assigns essays regularly, trying to get her students attention by assigning topics such as lowering the driving age.

One afternoon, Melinda hangs up the canned food drive posters she has drawn. She finds the activity pleasant and hopes that maybe it will help restore her reputation. However, IT walks by and whispers in her ear, causing her to panic and run away, abandoning her posters.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, DEAD FROGS - "NAMING THE MONSTER"

Melinda is still traumatized, as evidenced by the symbol of the dead frog and her interaction with IT. The contrast between Melinda and Heather's characterizations also provide more insight into Melinda's mind. First, the dead frog Melinda has to dissect symbolizes her sense of self and the trauma she suffered. As she slices into the dead frog, she connects it to the attack she endured at the party, feeling once again "the cut" and smelling "the dirt, leaves in my hair." By fainting, Melinda is able to once again avoid thinking about the event fully and continues to wish she could make it disappear entirely from her brain.

Furthermore, while Melinda is able to frequently avoid thinking about what happened to her, any interaction with IT brings it right back. When IT whispers "freshmeat" into her ear, she immediately freaks out. Thus, while his attack on her is in the past, she continually feels at risk whenever he approaches, causing her to spiral deeper into depression and despair. For now, Melinda's only ways of coping are avoidance and silence, neither of which helps her overcome the pain she feels.

Finally, you learn more about Melinda through her observation of Heather's modeling stint. While Heather takes pleasure in revealing her body and being called sexy by the photographer, Melinda finds the whole production fake and demeaning. Heather's desire to be even skinnier and her willingness to pose and preen for the camera exasperate Melinda. Her distaste for the photo shoot is apparent, but she is also a little envious of Heather's confidence. For instance, on the ride to the photo shoot, Melinda imagines wearing gold eye shadow as a beautiful yet untouchable alien. However, she backs away from this image by purchasing black and red nail polish to cover her chewed up nails. In doing so, she once again backs away from a positive image of herself, settling on makeup that expresses her depression rather than challenging it.

SUMMARY SECOND MARKING PERIOD, RENT ROUND 3 - "DARK ART"

Melinda's guidance counselor calls her mom to warn her about Melinda's upcoming report card. Melinda's parents fume at her, but she continues to ignore their attempts to find out why she is doing so poorly in school. They decide to ground her. Melinda finds a paperclip and scratches her wrist; her mom tells her to knock it off.

Melinda and Heather spend their lunch time sitting at the periphery of the Martha table. Heather is in trouble with the Marthas because they do not like the posters she had Melinda draw and are upset that she, Heather, brought in beets for the canned food drive. One of the Marthas spots Andy Evans and you learn that Andy is, in fact, IT. Andy comes over to talk to the Marthas and plays with Melinda's hair while he does so. She runs away to hide in the bathroom and vomits. Heather does not come looking for her.

Mr. Freeman is depressed. In protest of budget cuts, he has not done any paperwork and now the administration is upset with him for giving all his students As. He sits grimly in front of his painting, but doesn't do any work. Melinda works on carving yet another linoleum block and ends up putting a gash in her thumb. After Mr. Freeman helps her clean up her thumb and her chisel, he uses the chisel to put a giant slash through his canvas.

ANALYSIS SECOND MARKING PERIOD, RENT ROUND 3 - "DARK ART"

Through Melinda's cutting herself, the naming of IT, and Heather ignoring Melinda's freak out, you see Melinda fall deeper into her feelings of isolation and despair. First, Melinda's use of a paperclip to scratch her wrist symbolizes her hopelessness. Much like Melinda's nail-biting and lip-biting, scratching herself is another way she tries to express physically the pain she feels emotionally. However, just as with these other physical signs of distress, her message is not being received. Instead of seeing Melinda's scratches as a cry for help, Melinda's mom warns her to simply stop it as she doesn't have time for such behavior. Thus the theme of silence, and the problems that silence causes, continues to develop.

Secondly, the reader finally learns the name of IT (it's Andy Evans) and about his reputation. The Marthas gossip about Andy and see him not only as a notorious flirt and womanizer, but as desirable because of his looks and charm. Through this characterization of Andy, you see that while other girls have heard negative rumors about him, he retains a positive reputation. The Marthas' negative remarks about him, however, foreshadow that he has hurt other girls.

Finally, Heather's behavior toward Melinda reveals just how much she and Melinda use each other rather than see each other as true friends. For Melinda, Heather is a screen, protecting her from feeling like a complete outcast at school. For Heather, Melinda is a life raft, a friend she clings to until she can find someone better. Thus, it is not surprising that when the Marthas insult Melinda's posters and when Melinda flees when Andy shows up at lunch that Heather does nothing to support her. Heather's dismissal of Melinda, however, makes Heather less useful as a stand-in friend for Melinda and further heightens her sense of isolation.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, DEATH OF THE WOMBAT - "ESCAPE"

Winter has descended on Syracuse, and Melinda sleeps through her alarm one morning because it is so dark outside. Her mom makes her walk to school and on her way there Melinda decides to stop at the local bakery. In the bakery parking lot she sees Andy Evans. Melinda freezes, hoping he won't see her, but he does. He approaches her, offering her a bite of his jelly donut. She runs away and decides to skip school.

At first, Melinda spends her free day wandering around Main Street. She eventually tires of the cold, slushy streets, so she takes the bus to the mall. In the mall, she wanders around, enjoying the solitude, and remembers how much she enjoyed fifth grade and wishes she could go back. She also considers telling someone what happened to her last summer, thinking she might as well get it over with. She spends her entire school day at the mall then heads home, determined to give herself another occasional day off in the future.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, DEATH OF THE WOMBAT - "ESCAPE"

Through the use of metaphor, memory, and Melinda's internal dialogue, Anderson helps us gain a fuller understanding of Melinda's character. First, by using the metaphor of a baby rabbit, you see that Melinda feels powerless and vulnerable when confronted by Andy Evans. Like a baby rabbit, she feels she has only two options: freezing and trying to be invisible, or fleeing the scene. This metaphor also builds on earlier metaphors Melinda has used to describe herself and her feelings (such as the animal or beast that lives in her gut). Through these ongoing metaphors, Anderson shows that as long as Melinda characterizes herself as powerless and vulnerable, she will continue to feel that way and be unable to make a change in her life.

Secondly, Melinda's recollections about fifth grade recall her other memories of childhood. When thinking about fifth grade, Melinda feels happy and safe, enjoying the mix of freedom and protection she felt at that age. Similarly, Melinda's memories of the apple orchard and past Christmases also recall these feelings of safety and contentment. Thus, through the use of such memories, Melinda is able to ignore both her present and her future.

While Melinda's memories and metaphors focus on her suffering, her internal dialogue suggests she is slowly moving toward healing. For the first time, Melinda thinks to herself that she might be able to tell someone what happened. By finally acknowledging that speaking up is a possibility, Melinda makes a first, tenuous step toward sharing her suffering with others and finding a way through it.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CODE BREAKING - "LUNCH DOOM"

In English class, Melinda reads Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter and Hairwoman makes the class focus on discovering the symbols in the text and what they suggest. Melinda enjoys the work as she likens it to breaking a code. Rachel, however, voices her distaste for searching for symbols, suggesting that Hawthorne did not intentionally put them in the text. Hairwoman protests Rachel's point by assigning the entire class an essay on symbolism.

In art, Mr. Freeman finds a way around paperwork by painting all his students' names and progress on the wall of his classroom. He has also started a new painting, though right now it is just a sheet of deep, midnight blue. Melinda struggles with her tree assignment, reading over landscape books but not finding any inspiration.

During lunch one day, Heather and Melinda sit alone. Heather nervously approaches the subject of their friendship. After some hemming and hawing, she finally tells Melinda that she does not want to be friends anymore. Melinda is surprised by how upset she feels because she had not considered Heather a true friend until this moment. Heather tells her it is because Melinda has a bad reputation and that she needs to watch out for herself. Then she runs off to join the Marthas at their table.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CODE BREAKING - "LUNCH DOOM"

Through the use of allusion, parallel characters, and the continued exploration of Melinda and Heather's friendship, Anderson deepens your understanding of Melinda and what she is feeling. First, Anderson creates an allusion to The Scarlet Letter by comparing Hester and Melinda's situations. In The Scarlet Letter, Hester is forced to wear a scarlet letter "A" to signify the adultery she committed; however, Hester refuses to expose her lover to the same public shame she endures and is silent for much of the novel. Melinda can relate to Hester in several ways. For one, like Hester, she also wears her shame publicly through her nail- and lip-biting. Melinda even suggests that she would wear an "S" for shame (among other things) if she were forced to wear a letter. Finally, while both Melinda and Hester see silence as a solution, their respective silence becomes increasingly oppressive as their stories unfold. Hester is forced to suffer alone, without the companionship of her lover (who, in his own silence, suffers even more than she) just as Melinda suffers alone because of her silence.

In "Stunted," Anderson also draws deeper parallels between Mr. Freeman and Melinda. At this point in the novel, both of them are struggling with their relationship to their artwork. For example, Mr. Freeman has destroyed his commentary on the school board and is unsure what artistic project to take on next. Melinda continues to carve linoleum blocks, but without any true clarity of purpose. By showing an adult struggle alongside the teenage Melinda, Anderson deepens Mr. Freeman's character and his function as a role model for Melinda. Anderson creates an adult who is also struggling, but who refuses to give up.

Furthermore, as Heather and Melinda's friendship comes to an end, Anderson shows us the power of reputation in high school life. At the start of the novel, Melinda bemoans her new reputation as an outcast and has been unable to shake it throughout the school year. With Heather to distract her, Melinda has been able to ignore the impact that her own reputation has made on her inability to speak up. Heather, too, is affected by the issue of reputation. As someone who craves social approval, Heather can no longer deal with being friends with Melinda, who she sees as a threat to her quest. Heather cannot overcome her fixation on how others see her, and this prevents her from being a true friend to Melinda. Furthermore, Melinda cannot overcome her fear of additional social rejection if she were to speak up. Thus, the power of reputation prevents both of them from having deeper, less superficial relationships — with each other, as well with as others.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CONJUGATE THIS - "OUR LADY OF THE WAITING ROOM"

Valentine's Day arrives causing Melinda to remember past Valentine's Days. She remembers that in grade school, everyone got a valentine card and celebrated the holiday openly. In middle school, crushes were shared covertly through an intricate network of friends who passed messages to each other. When she gets to her locker in the morning and sees a valentine taped to it, she is so shaken up she can't read it and goes directly to biology class instead. She wonders and kind of hopes the note is from David. As they sit together in biology, Melinda pulls at her thumbnail, causing it to bleed. David hands her a tissue, inspiring her to write him a thank you message in her notebook. They pass the notebook back and forth for the rest of class, sharing messages and drawings. Melinda's hopes are crushed after class when she opens the valentine to find a message from Heather, thanking her for being so understanding about their ended friendship. Melinda, heartbroken and lonely, hides and cries in her janitor's closet.

The next time Melinda ditches school, she misses the bus stop for the mall and winds up at Lady of Mercy Hospital. She wanders the halls, lounging in waiting rooms and enjoying the cafeteria food. She considers stealing the green gowns given to patients and finding an empty bed to sleep in, but then decides she is not really sick and does not really belong there.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CONJUGATE THIS - "OUR LADY OF THE WAITING ROOM"

In these sections, Anderson once again uses motifs of memory, physical wounds, and naming to characterize Melinda's internal conflict. In "Cutting Out Hearts," Melinda's memories about Valentine's Day are very similar to her memories of fifth grade and the apple orchard. All of these memories are characterized by a sense of innocence and security. For instance, in Melinda's memory of grade school Valentine exchanges, she takes pleasure in the fact that everyone gave and received notes — no one was left out, as she is now. Through these memories Anderson is able to show us Melinda's desire to have her feeling of innocence returned to her.

Secondly, Melinda's torn thumbnail is another item in the ongoing motif of her self-inflicted wounds. In this section, Melinda tears her nail as a way to distract herself from her concern about the Valentine she received and her feelings for David. David notices her bleeding thumb and helps her by giving her a tissue. The exchange of messages that follows is what makes this instance of self-harm different in that, instead of it being a sign others ignore, it is a sign to which someone (David) compassionately responds. Through David's kind response to her pain, Melinda experiences a brief spell of happiness and emotional connection.

The name of the hospital that Melinda finds, Our Lady of Mercy, symbolizes Melinda's deep need for mercy. For much of Melinda's visit to the hospital she seeks out mercy. She visits various waiting rooms, eats in the cafeteria, and contemplates stealing a hospital gown. Yet none of these activities truly make her feel better — she even goes so far as to conclude she is not sick (well, not the kind of "sick that you can see") and does not belong there. Thus, Anderson indicates that the kind of mercy Melinda needs is not necessarily physical, but emotional — perhaps even spiritual.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CLASH OF THE TITANS - "PICASSO"

Melinda and her parents meet with Principal Principal and Melinda's guidance counselor in an effort to sort out Melinda's difficulties at school. All four adults try to get Melinda to talk and come up with different reasons for her silence. Mom thinks it is because Melinda wants attention; Dad thinks it is the school's fault. The guidance counselor tentatively suggests Melinda is quiet because of her parents' marriage problems. At the end of the meeting, Melinda remains silent despite all of the adults, and sees them as fools for not understanding why her life is a mess.

The result of Melinda's meeting is a contract with the school that outlines consequences for her poor behavior. Thus, when Melinda skips school one day, she is punished the next day with in-school suspension. Mr. Neck supervises her and the other students in suspension, who must spend the day in quiet, uninterrupted boredom. Andy Evans enters suspension and sits near Melinda, causing her feel like a scared rabbit. When Mr. Neck is not looking, Andy blows in her ear.

In art class, Mr. Freeman can tell that Melinda is stuck, so he gives her a book featuring reprints of various Picasso paintings. Melinda is not interested in Picasso's early works, but falls quickly and completely in love with Cubism. She draws a Cubist tree and both she and Mr. Freeman are delighted by her project.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, CLASH OF THE TITANS - "PICASSO"

In these sections, Melinda uses a variety of strategies to avoid facing the problems in her life. The first strategy she uses is during the meeting between her parents, the principal, and her guidance counselor. During the meeting, Melinda pretends her parents are tap dancing on Principal Principal's desk and even laughs out loud at the image. Through this imaginative exercise, Melinda removes herself from the meeting, at least emotionally, and disengages from the school problems (which are actually just symptoms of her emotional problems) that the adults in her life are trying to address.

The second strategy Melinda uses is metaphor; once again she turns herself into "BunnyRabbit" when Andy Evans joins the suspended students. Recall that Melinda used this metaphor earlier in the novel when she and Andy are in the bakery parking lot. Once again, while this metaphor rescues her from having to directly deal with Andy — a baby rabbit is dealing with him, not her — it also prevents her from having power in the situation because she turns herself into something vulnerable.

The third strategy Melinda uses is her art work. In discovering Picasso, Melinda finds a new way to see the world around her and to change it into something that makes sense. By creating a Cubist tree, Melinda revises the way she sees trees. She constructs the tree out fragments of her life — lockers, for instance — and in doing so, gains power over her life and distance from her problems. This third strategy is the most useful to Melinda as it helps her see beyond herself and start to participate in making sense of her life rather than avoiding the circumstances surrounding her.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, RIDING SHOTGUN - "GERMINATION"

After Melinda attends all her classes for an entire week, her guidance counselor suggests to her parents that she deserves a reward. They settle on the reward of clothes shopping, but tell Melinda she has to get new clothes at her mother's store, Effert's. Melinda is not looking forward to shopping with her mom, let alone at her mom's unstylish store, but she needs new clothes, so she goes along with it. While waiting for the bus after school to go to the store, Mr. Freeman sees her and offers to give her a lift in his Volvo.

On the ride to Effert's, Mr. Freeman and Melinda talk about art and she asks him what she is supposed to feel in order to get emotion into her art. He tells her to focus on her feelings, not the tree, as she is creating. He assures her that she is worthwhile and that he wants to know what is on her mind.

At the store, Melinda's mom is still working, so Melinda picks out jeans and tries them on alone. While standing in front of the dressing-room mirrors, Melinda examines herself. She remembers a movie about a woman who survived a fire and had new skin grafted onto her body. Melinda feels as if she is also waiting for her new skin to take hold, and she vows to try to be more normal.

In biology class, Ms. Keen informs the students their next test will focus on seeds. Melinda throws all her effort into studying and discovers she admires plants. She likes how plants create more seeds than will grow and is impressed by seeds' ability to germinate when so many conditions need to be just right.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, RIDING SHOTGUN - "GERMINATION"

Here, Anderson presents three instances of Melinda's taking steps toward changing her life and facing the trauma that haunts her. The first step Melinda takes is discussing emotions with Mr. Freeman. While Melinda does not speak directly about her feelings, she is the one who initiated the conversation about emotions. In doing so, she establishes a closer connection to Mr. Freeman. Mr. Freeman observes Melinda's anxiety on the subject of feelings, so he assures her he will support her is she needs it. Through this exchange, Melinda makes a tenuous step toward sharing her pain.

Melinda's next step toward change is the metaphor she comes up with while trying on new jeans. While remembering the film she saw about the burn victim, she gets to thinking about what it would be like to have a new skin. Through the metaphor of new skin, she is able to start thinking about a new life for herself.

Melinda's study of seeds underscores the new-skin metaphor, because seeds symbolize hope, growth, and the promise of new life. Melinda's study of seeds reveals their tenacious character: Seeds need special conditions and a lot of luck to survive and turn into mature plants. Melinda admires plants and their seeds and in them finds qualities she would like to see in herself — bravery, expansiveness, vivacity. These sections mark a potential turning point in Melinda's life as she moves slightly away from her depression and engages with the possibility that she has control over changing the way she is dealing with her trauma.

SUMMARY THIRD MARKING PERIOD, BOLOGNA EXILE - "A NIGHT TO REMEMBER"

Since Melinda has no friends with whom to eat lunch, she needs a coping strategy. She asks her mom to buy food so she can bring her lunch to school and avoid the trauma of waiting alone in the cafeteria line. She tries to read while she eats, but mostly she observes her fellow teenagers, noticing how some students — like the Marthas — appear confident, while all around the lunch room there are other outsiders like her.

It snows eight inches, but school remains open. Melinda notices how depressed and worn out her teachers look and thinks it would be good for them to get a snow day and get away from their students. Hairwoman asks the class what Nathaniel Hawthorne uses snow to symbolize. Melinda thinks snow would mean silence — and cold.

One day after school Melinda retreats to her janitor's closet, not quite ready to go home. She falls asleep for several hours and wakes in a panic when she hears a basketball game going on down the hall. It's nearly 9 p.m. She races down the hall, but gets drawn into the game and watches the last few minutes from the sidelines. David Petrakis sees her and suggests she join him and his folks for pizza at his house. Melinda makes up an excuse not to go, and on her walk home imagines there are two Melindas inside her. One Melinda thinks she is an idiot for not hanging out with David and enjoying her life. The other Melinda tells her she needs to be careful and not to trust anyone.

That night she cannot sleep and crawls out her window onto the porch roof. Wrapped in blankets, staring at the moon, Melinda goes through the details of that night in August. She and Rachel and their friends got Rachel's brother to drive them to a party outside of town. There was music and some beer kegs in a barn. Melinda downed three beers quickly and then wandered out into the night, away from the others. A handsome senior boy that she named "Greek God" found her and danced with her. He kissed her then forced her onto the ground. Melinda tried to scream, but he covered her mouth and she was too drunk to do much else. He raped her and then she called 911. Traumatized, she couldn't say anything to the 911 dispatcher or anyone at the party. Everyone fled as the police arrived, and Melinda's friends were furious with her. She walked home alone to an empty house. Now she stands on the roof, her lips bleeding from where she has bitten them clean through.

ANALYSIS THIRD MARKING PERIOD, BOLOGNA EXILE - "A NIGHT TO REMEMBER"

Melinda's character develops in these sections through her power of observation, her description of the "Two Melindas," and her ability to finally describe her rape.

First, Melinda's observations of her peers and her teachers help us see more qualities of her character, particularly her intelligence and her compassion. When observing the socializing that happens in the school cafeteria, Melinda recognizes various cliques. For example, she can see that the Marthas have taken another new student under their wing, but she can tell the new student does not have the right clothes to truly be accepted to the group. Through such observations, Anderson shows us that Melinda has an acute sense of the drama of high school life and keenly feels the sting of being on the outskirts. Additionally, Melinda shows compassion in her observation of her teachers. By observing that her teachers look tired and pale, Melinda understands that her teachers are real people who also become downtrodden and worn out by life.

Additionally, the introduction of the "Two Melindas" reveals the depth of Melinda's struggle with her decision to remain silent and cut off from life. The first Melinda yells at her for ruining all the fun she could be having; the second Melinda assures her that avoiding boys, even nice ones like David, is essential to survival. The "third" Melinda, the Melinda caught between the two, is torn. Anderson makes it clear that the only way Melinda will feel whole again is if she reconciles these two parts of herself and finds a way to balance her need for security with living a full, vibrant life.

Finally, Melinda, unable to reconcile her two selves, is forced to go through the details of that night in August. In doing so, she "speaks" for the first time by finally providing details about her rape. As she relives the events of that evening, Anderson unveils more of what happened that night and why Melinda chooses to deal with her rape without seeking the support of her friends and family. For instance, you see how excited and happy Melinda is at the start of the party and how Andy Evans cruelly takes that excitement and joy away from her by raping her. You also see how party attendees misconstrue her call to 911, causing her to become a social outcast. These circumstances exemplify the heavy burdens that make it so hard for Melinda to speak and why it is so necessary for her to do so in order to move beyond the events of that night.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, EXTERMINATORS - "GENETICS"

Once again Merryweather High School's mascot is up for debate. The PTA takes offense at the "Horny Hornet" cheer the cheerleaders use, and the student council defends the student body's right to be "hornets."

Signs of spring begin to emerge. The snow finally turns to slush and seniors are receiving rejection and admission notices from colleges in the mail. Andy joins the International Club and hangs out with Rachel and her exchange student friend Melinda refers to as Greta/Ingrid. Easter comes and goes without much fanfare, though Melinda remembers going to church with her grandparents when they were alive and kind of misses the tradition.

On the last day of spring break, Melinda wanders the mall and finds Ivy, sketching, by a line of kids getting their faces painted. The girls chat about their art projects and Ivy encourages Melinda, telling her she has talent. They work on a sketch of a tree together.

In biology, Ms. Keen reviews genetics, causing Melinda to think about which of her traits comes from her mom and which from her dad. When she was a young child she liked to imagine she was an adopted princess and that any day her real family would show up and whisk her away to a glamorous life. One day a limo showed up to take her dad to the airport and she thought her fantasy had come true. But instead of being happy, she was terrified at the possibility of leaving her family. Now she wishes someone really would come and rescue her from her life.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, EXTERMINATORS - "GENETICS"

In these sections, spring is a metaphor for the changes happening inside Melinda and foreshadows future problems with Andy Evans. Throughout the novel, the weather serves as a backdrop for Melinda's emotions. All winter she was as cold and as silent as snow, hibernating within the fortress of herself. With spring's arrival, however, Melinda, like the earth around her, is beginning to thaw and getting ready to help seeds germinate. For instance, when Melinda and Ivy hang out at the mall, Melinda is tempted to bite her lip and remain silent, but instead she sucks on a hard candy and she and Ivy end up drawing a tree together. In this scene, Melinda not only reconnects with an old friend, but also gains confidence in her ability to complete her tree project.

Additionally, Anderson foreshadows that Andy Evans will continue to be a problem in Melinda's life. In addition to harassing Melinda, he is now hanging out with her former best friend, Rachel. Melinda sees this development and is concerned. As Andy pursues Rachel, pay attention to how it affects Melinda and her ability to continue to open up and start to heal from the trauma of her rape.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, MY LIFE AS A SPY - "GROWING PAINS"

Melinda is certain Rachel is crazy because she has gone to the movies with Andy Evans (aka Andy Beast). Melinda listens to Rachel gush about Andy throughout algebra class and after class ends, Melinda follows Rachel through the halls. Soon enough, Andy descends on Rachel and her friend Greta/Ingrid, and Rachel and Andy end up sitting together in the hallway. He teases Rachel by stealing her notebook; they kiss. Melinda feels sick as she watches the whole thing.

Melinda retreats to her closet to contemplate the situation. She is torn between wanting to leave Rachel to her fate and speaking to Rachel to protect her from harm. As she vacillates between the two ideas, Melinda stares at her Maya Angelou poster and knows Maya wants her to tell. So, Melinda writes an anonymous note warning Rachel that Andy has attacked a ninth grader.

In art, Mr. Freeman critiques Melinda's tree progress. He says the tree is not truly "alive" and that Melinda needs to put herself into it. She dumps her linoleum block in the trash, but Mr. Freeman brings it back to her and insists she keep trying. She gets back to work.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, MY LIFE AS A SPY - "GROWING PAINS"

Anderson exemplifies Melinda's continuing emotional growth in several ways: Melinda's internal dialogue about Rachel; her decision to write a warning note; and her experience in art class. First, Melinda feels torn about what to do about Rachel's developing relationship with Andy Beast. One side of her argues that she should just leave Rachel alone while the other side insists she should protect Rachel. By wrestling with her options and with a little symbolic help from Maya Angelou, Melinda chooses to do what is right and writes a note to Rachel.

Furthermore, the note becomes another sign of Melinda's internal growth. For instance, through this note, Melinda makes yet another step toward speaking up. Recall that her first step was describing her rape to herself while standing on her porch roof. Now she tells someone else about it, albeit anonymously, helping her get closer to sharing her pain with others.

Finally, Melinda's struggle with her tree project is also symbolic of her growth. As she outlines the various phases she has gone through in creating trees, she is really outlining her internal struggle with being raped. For instance, when she was most depressed and reserved, she was in her "Dead Period" when all her trees "looked like they had been through a forest fire." Now, as Melinda is trying to make sense of the new phase in her life, her tree is also struggling to take proper shape to express her developing confidence.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, GAG ORDER - "ADVICE FROM A SMART MOUTH"

David Petrakis' lawyer meets with Mr. Neck and his lawyer; while Melinda isn't privy to the details of that meeting, she can tell David's lawyer has won. David is allowed to give long answers in history class, and Mr. Neck keeps himself under control. Mr. Neck even offers the class an opportunity to earn extra credit by writing a report about the turn of the century. Melinda chooses to write about the suffragettes and all they went through to earn equal rights for women. She is sure she has written a great report, but when she turns it in, Mr. Neck says she must do it as an oral report.

Melinda is horrified about having to make an oral presentation and turns to David for advice. They create a plan. On the day of her report, Melinda hangs a suffragette poster over a note she has written on the blackboard. When she stands up to give her speech, she tears off the poster, revealing a statement regarding her right to stand up, just as the suffragettes did, for what she believes. She believes she has the right to remain silent; David helps her pass out copies of her report to the class to read. Mr. Neck marches Melinda down to Principal Principal and she gets another in-school suspension.

After Melinda serves her suspension, David writes her a note sympathizing with her situation. They talk it over by her locker. He tells her that while she should not have been punished, she was wrong in that she was standing up for silence. He tells her that being silent lets the bad guys win. Melinda contemplates his comments and David says he would like to call her sometime.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, GAG ORDER - "ADVICE FROM A SMART MOUTH"

Melinda's research, her performance in history class, and her talk with David all reinforce Anderson's theme that silence is not a good solution to a problem. First, by researching the suffragettes, Melinda learns more about the rights for which women once fought. In doing so, she gains a greater respect for what those women suffered in order to be treated equally and admires their courage. Through Melinda's description of the suffragettes, Anderson demonstrates that Melinda, too, needs to be brave and stand up for herself.

When Mr. Neck forces Melinda to present her speech, she does so silently, as an act of protest. This act of protest is yet another step toward breaking her silence. Even though she is silent during her performance, Melinda applies at least part of what she learned from the suffragettes: that you have to stand up for yourself because no one else will.

Melinda's talk with David takes this lesson one step further because he shows her that it is an oxymoron for her to stand up for her right to remain silent. David tells her that he does not agree with Mr. Neck's punishment but that she was wrong to remain silent. He goes on to say that staying silent allows oppression to continue. David's thoughts strike a chord with Melinda, who struggles not only with the issue of telling others about being raped, but also with how to protect Rachel from Andy. Thus, through the discussion of her performance, Melinda hears what she has needed to hear all along: that her choice to remain silent is a choice to remain victimized.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, THE BEAST PROWLS - "REAL SPRING"

Melinda stays after school to work on her tree project. Mr. Freeman shows her how to draw a giant tree in three strokes. After Mr. Freeman gets called to a meeting, Melinda works alone and is surprised when the lights flicker on and off. Andy comes into the room and Melinda freezes in terror. He asks her if she has seen Rachel; Melinda remains silent and panicked. Rachel walks in, followed shortly by Ivy. After Rachel and Andy leave, Ivy says that Andy is a total creep. Melinda flees the scene and goes home to hide and weep in her closet.

Melinda decides she needs a day off after her latest encounter with Andy. She pretends to be sick, but ends up having a real fever. She spends the day nestled on the couch, watching TV, and imagines what various talk show hosts would say about her rape. All of them insist that she is not to blame, even though she was drunk, and that Andy is a total jerk who needs to be held accountable.

May brings warm weather and an end to the seemingly endless rain. Melinda spends a Saturday morning outside, raking out leaves from beneath the shrubs lining the front of her house. Her dad admires her progress and says he will buy some leaf bags. He invites her to come to the hardware store with him, but she doesn't feel like it. She does, however, ask him to pick up some flower seeds.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, THE BEAST PROWLS - "REAL SPRING"

In these sections, Anderson helps us see Melinda's development through the theme of naming, her imaginary interaction with talk show hosts, and her desire to grow flowers. To begin, Melinda's relationship to her rapist, Andy Evans, has evolved throughout the novel as shown by the different ways she names him. Recall that when she first met him at the summer party, she nicknames him "Greek God." After the rape, she minimizes him to two letters: IT. Then she uses his full name, Andy Evans, indicating she is more willing to confront what happened to her. From there, she moves on to call him Andy Beast, suggesting she is not only willing to face him but to call him what he is — a horrible animal, a beast. However, when he confronts her in the art room, she reverts to calling him IT, which reveals just how terrified she still is of him. Andy's shifting names stand in contrast to other characters that Melinda names, like David Petrakis, whom Melinda always calls by his full name, making him seem more stable and complete. Thus, Anderson uses Melinda's naming habits to show her feelings toward those around her.

Furthermore, while Melinda's latest encounter with Andy shakes her, it does not sidetrack her steady journey to recovery. Melinda deals with Andy by pretending famous talk show hosts, like Oprah and Jerry Springer, are commenting on her rape. Through their encouragement of her and their rancor toward Andy, Melinda begins to understand that she truly did not deserve what happened to her. Melinda's imaginary therapy session gives her the stamina to continue growing, represented by her new interest in gardening and yard work. Anderson uses Melinda's day of yard work, followed by her request for flower seeds, to symbolize Melinda's own "spring cleaning" of her soul. She is like the small, green plants she finds suffocating under decaying leaves; through participating in hard, rewarding work, Melinda starts to clear the rotting "leaves" out of her troubled soul.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, FAULT! - "PROM PREPARATION"

In gym class, the girls play tennis. Melinda is pretty good at the sport so she gets matched up with Nicole. They play a close game, and Melinda remembers how much she loves tennis and considers asking her dad to practice with her.

In art class one day, Ivy accidentally gets marking-pen ink on Melinda's shirt. The girls go to the bathroom to try to clean up Melinda's shirt. Melinda removes her shirt and while Ivy scrubs it, Melinda stands in a toilet stall reading graffiti on the walls. She asks Ivy why she said Andy Evans was a creep, and Ivy says she has heard he will sleep with anyone. Melinda asks for one of Ivy's markers and starts a comment thread on the wall. She makes a list of "guys to stay away from" and puts Andy at the top of it.

The school is aflutter with talk of senior prom. Andy invites Rachel to go with him, making Melinda sick to her stomach. Heather shows up on Melinda's doorstep a few days before the prom, whining about her life with the Marthas. The Marthas have made her responsible for decorating for prom and she begs Melinda to help her. Melinda says no.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, FAULT! - "PROM PREPARATION"

Melinda experiences three triumphs in these sections that foreshadow her forthcoming ability to speak up about what happened to her. The first triumph Melinda experiences is in gym class. During her tennis match with Nicole, Melinda is able to not only productively channel her anger, but also to experience the thrill of being good at something. Through her near defeat of Nicole, Melinda starts thinking about the future and tentatively makes plans to ask her dad to practice with her. Recall that for much of the novel, Melinda doubted her ability to survive ninth grade, let alone make even minimal plans. Thus, her decision to pursue tennis as a hobby indicates her new engagement with life.

Melinda's second triumph is her note written in the girls' bathroom stall. By writing down that Andy Evans is a guy to stay away from, Melinda moves one step closer to explaining just exactly why he is someone to avoid. Additionally, in this same scene, Melinda talks to Ivy about Andy. By hearing Ivy's negative opinion of Andy, Melinda understands that she is not alone in hating him and that if and when she decides to speak up she will find allies in the other girls whom Andy has also hurt.

Melinda's third triumph is over her unhealthy friendship with Heather. When Heather comes crawling back to Melinda, begging her for decorating help, Melinda realizes how crazy her friendship with Heather was. For instance, Heather tells Melinda she is smart for staying out of the social fray, even though it was Heather's abandonment of Melinda that kept her so far removed from social activity. Melinda sees through Heather's superficiality and refuses to help. In the past Melinda would have silently acquiesced to whatever Heather demanded. Melinda's ability to say no out loud suggests she has regained both her self-confidence and her sense of self-worth.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, COMMUNICATION 101 - "PROWLING"

Melinda, empowered by saying no to Heather, takes on the challenge of talking to Rachel about Andy Evans. She finds Rachel in the library during study hall and they talk briefly, even sharing a few laughs. Melinda brings up the topic of Andy and Rachel moons over him. The librarian yells at them for being loud, so they start writing notes to each other in Melinda's notebook. Melinda tells Rachel that someone raped her the night of the party and that is why she called the police. Rachel is immediately sympathetic to Melinda, but changes gears when Melinda tells her it was Andy who did it. Rachel screams that she is a liar and storms out of the library.

After school, while waiting for the bus, Melinda is downtrodden by Rachel's refusal to believe her. However, her outlook perks up when Ivy finds her and tells Melinda she has something to show her. Ivy takes her to the girls' bathroom and shows Melinda how her comment about Andy Evans has turned into a whole wall of commentary. Heaps of girls share her sentiment and share their stories about being hurt or taken advantage of by Andy. Melinda's new sense of empowerment returns.

On Saturday morning, Melinda wakes up to noise from the arborists her dad has hired to cut off the sick branches of their tree. Melinda goes outside to watch the process and then goes for a long bike ride. She ends up back at the farm where the party was last summer. She sits under a tree and thinks about how she is a survivor and that she wants to nurture herself and embrace life once again.

That night, Melinda enjoys a nice dinner with her parents on the deck, and then falls asleep on the couch. She wakes in the middle of the night feeling restless, so she goes for another bike ride through the quiet streets of her neighborhood. On this ride she feels truly free and alive.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, COMMUNICATION 101 - "PROWLING"

Anderson expands the theme of silence versus speaking through Melinda's efforts at speaking up and their effects on her well-being in these sections. First, Melinda finally tells someone she was raped, a notable moment in her long journey from silence to finding her voice. While Rachel rejects Melinda's revelation as a lie, Melinda still benefits from the act of speaking up. One of the key benefits Melinda experiences is the comfort in knowing she tried to protect Rachel, rather than letting her own fears keep her from doing so.

Any qualms Melinda still has about telling Rachel what happened are diminished when she sees the wall of comments about Andy in the bathroom. At that moment, Melinda realizes that she is not alone and that by speaking up, she has created a space for other girls to share their troubles. Thus, Anderson argues that it is only through giving voice to traumatic or unjust experiences that healing and honest connections between people can occur. Melinda's sense of solidarity in this scene foreshadows that she may also eventually share a connection with Rachel again.

Finally, having shared the story of her rape, Melinda is able to find internal peace. On her bike ride, she returns to the scene of the rape. Instead of feeling sorry for herself, Melinda embraces the role of a survivor and sees herself as a "Melindagirl" seed, ready to grow and flower. Through this moment, along with Melinda's celebratory bike ride, Anderson revisits the metaphor of seeds and makes explicit the connection between Melinda's growth and the germination of a seed; the right elements have coalesced to help Melinda see that she can not only survive but thrive as well.

SUMMARY FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, POSTPROM - "FINAL CUT"

On the Monday after prom, the whole school is buzzing with prom gossip. Heather does not go to school because her decorations were horrible and everyone is criticizing her about them. Melinda hears through the grapevine that Rachel dumped Andy at the prom. He was groping her on the dance floor and when she told him to back off, he got angry. She left him and spent the rest of the night with her foreign exchange student friends.

In algebra class, Melinda has the startling realization that she no longer wants to hide in her janitor's closet. She goes there one last time after school to take her drawings and books. After she finishes cleaning up and she is getting ready to leave, someone pushes her back into the closet and shuts the door; it's Andy. He yells at her for telling Rachel about the rape and begins to attack her. She pushes him away and he comes at her again, pushing her against the countertop. She bashes the mirror on the wall with her turkey sculpture, breaking the mirror and enabling her to grab a shard of glass. She wields it at Andy, screaming all the while, and he backs off. The girls' lacrosse team, having heard Melinda's screams, pound against the door. She unlocks it, and one of them goes for help.

On the last day of school, Melinda stays late to put the finishing touches on her tree project. Mr. Freeman is working on a new painting, of a sunrise. Some seniors stop by to say goodbye to him and one of them tells Melinda she hopes she is okay. Since her latest altercation with Andy, she has regained her reputation and people respect her — even Rachel has called her. Melinda is happy with her tree, because it looks alive and real. When she finishes, Mr. Freeman tells her she has earned an A+. He says he can tell she has had a rough year and Melinda decides to finally tell him about it.

ANALYSIS FOURTH MARKING PERIOD, POSTPROM - "FINAL CUT"

By the novel's end, Anderson has shown how much Melinda has grown through her ability to stand up to Andy and her completion of her tree project. First, in her altercation with Andy, Melinda's behavior demonstrates how she has changed over the semester. Whereas when he raped her, she remained paralyzed and silent, now she screams and defends herself. When Melinda holds a shard of glass up to Andy's neck, he cannot speak. At that moment, Melinda and Andy are in reversed roles: Melinda now has power over Andy — but unlike Andy's power over her, hers is built on self-defense rather than a desire to hurt others.

Additionally, Melinda's successful completion of her tree in art class demonstrates the transformation she has undergone through the course of her freshman year. Recall the many stages of her tree project — from being able to draw only dead trees, to trying to create a perfect one. Now, she has created a tree that has wounds as well as new growth. Thus, Melinda's final iteration of the tree is the one that fully represents her: she has suffered, but she has not stopped growing. Through completion of the tree, and her decision to share her story with Mr. Freeman, Melinda is finally free of her own demons and able to appreciate her life again.


