FIRST MARKING PERIOD 



WELCOME TO MERRYWEATHER HIGH 



It is my first morning of high school. I have seven new note- 
books, a skirt I hate, and a stomachache. 

The school bus wheezes to my corner. The door opens and I 
step up. I am the first pickup of the day. The driver pulls away 
from the curb while I stand in the aisle. Where to sit? I've 
never been a backseat wasteease. If I sit in the middle, a 
stranger could sit next to me. If I sit in the front, it will make 
me look like a little kid, but I figure it's the best chance I have 
to make eye contact with one of my friends, if any of them 
have decided to talk to me yet. 

The bus picks up students in groups of four or five. As they 
walk down the aisle, people who were my middle-school lab 
partners or gym buddies glare at me. I close my eyes. This is 
what I've been dreading. As we leave the last stop, I am the 
only person sitting alone. 

The driver downshifts to drag us over the hills. The engine 
clanks, which makes the guys in the back holler something 
obscene. Someone is wearing too much cologne. I try to open 
my window, but the little latches won't move. A guy behind 
me unwraps his breakfast and shoots the wrapper at the back 
of my head. It bounces into my lap - a Ho-Ho.

We pass janitors painting over the sign in front of the high 
school. The school board has decided that "Merryweather 
High - Home of the Trojans" didn't send a strong abstinence
message, so they have transformed us into the Blue Devils. 
Better the Devil you know than the Trojan you don't, I guess. 
School colors will stay purple and gray. The board didn't want 
to spring for new uniforms. 

Older students are allowed to roam until the bell, but ninth- 
graders are herded into the auditorium. We fall into clans: 
Jocks, Country Clubbers, Idiot Savants, Cheerleaders, Human 
Waste, Eurotrash, Future Fascists of America, Big Hair Chix, 
the Marthas, Suffering Artists, Thespians, Goths, Shredders. I 
am clanless. I wasted the last weeks of August watching bad 
cartoons. I didn't go to the mall, the lake, or the pool, or an- 
swer the phone. I have entered high school with the wrong 
hair, the wrong clothes, the wrong attitude. And I don't have 
anyone to sit with. 

I am Outcast. 

There is no point looking for my ex-friends. Our clan, the 
Plain Janes, has splintered and the pieces are being absorbed 
by rival factions. Nicole lounges with the Jocks, comparing 
scars from summer league sports. Ivy floats between the Suf- 
fering Artists on one side of the aisle and the Thespians on the 
other. She has enough personality to travel with two packs. 
Jessica has moved to Nevada. No real loss. She was mostly 
Ivy's friend, anyway. 

The kids behind me laugh so loud I know they're laughing 
about me. I can't help myself. I turn around. It's Rachel, sur- 
rounded by a bunch of kids wearing clothes that most defi- 
nitely did not come from the EastSide Mall. Rachel Bruin, my 
ex-best friend. She stares at something above my left ear. 
Words climb up my throat. This was the girl who suffered 
through Brownies with me, who taught me how to swim, who 
understood about my parents, who didn't make fun of my 
bedroom. If there is anyone in the entire galaxy I am dying to 
tell what really happened, it's Rachel. My throat burns. 

Her eyes meet mine for a second. "I hate you," she mouths 
silently. She turns her back to me and laughs with her friends. 
I bite my lip. I am not going to think about it. It was ugly, but 
it's over, and I'm not going to think about it. My lip bleeds a 
little. It tastes like metal. I need to sit down. 

I stand in the center aisle of the auditorium, a wounded zebra 
in a National Geographic special, looking for someone, any- 
one, to sit next to. A predator approaches: gray jock buzz cut, 
whistle around a neck thicker than his head. Probably a social 
studies teacher, hired to coach a blood sport. 

Mr. Neck: "Sit." 

I grab a seat. Another wounded zebra turns and smiles at me. 
She's packing at least five grand worth of orthodontia, but has 
great shoes. "I'm Heather from Ohio," she says. "I'm new 
here. Are you?" I don't have time to answer. The lights dim 
and the indoctrination begins. 

THE FIRST TEN LIES THEY TELL YOU IN HIGH SCHOOL 

1. We are here to help you. 

2. You will have enough time to get to your class before 
the bell rings. 

3. The dress code will be enforced. 

4. No smoking is allowed on school grounds. 

5. Our football team will win the championship this year. 

6. We expect more of you here. 

7. Guidance counselors are always available to listen. 

8. Your schedule was created with your needs in mind. 

9. Your locker combination is private. 

10. These will be the years you look back on fondly. 



My first class is biology. I can't find it and get my first demerit 
for wandering the hall. It is 8:50 in the morning. Only 699 
days and 7 class periods until graduation. 



OUR TEACHERS ARE THE BEST . . . 

My English teacher has no face. She has uncombed stringy 
hair that droops on her shoulders. The hair is black from her 
part to her ears and then neon orange to the frizzy ends. I 
can't decide if she had pissed off her hairdresser or is morph- 
ing into a monarch butterfly. I call her Hairwoman. 

Hairwoman wastes twenty minutes taking attendance because 
she won't look at us. She keeps her head bent over her desk so 
the hair flops in front of her face. She spends the rest of class 
writing on the board and speaking to the flag about our re- 
quired reading. She wants us to write in our class journals 
every day, but promises not to read them. I write about how 
weird she is. 

We have journals in social studies, too. The school must have 
gotten a good price on journals. We are studying American 
history for the ninth time in nine years. Another review 
of map skills, one week of Native Americans, Christ- 
opher Columbus in time for Columbus Day, the Pilgrims in 
time for Thanksgiving. Every year they say we're going to get 
right up to the present, but we always get stuck in the Indus- 
trial Revolution. We got to World War I in seventh grade - 
who knew there had been a war with the whole world? We 
need more holidays to keep the social studies teachers on 
track. 

My social studies teacher is Mr. Neck, the same guy who 
growled at me to sit down in the auditorium. He remembers 
me fondly. "I got my eye on you. Front row." 

Nice seeing you again, too. I bet he suffers from post-traumatic 
stress disorder. Vietnam or Iraq - one of those TV wars. 



SPOTLIGHT 

I find my locker after social studies. The lock sticks a little, 
but I open it. I dive into the stream of fourth-period lunch stu- 
dents and swim down the hall to the cafeteria. 

I know enough not to bring lunch on the first day of high 
school. There is no way of telling what the acceptable fashion 
will be. Brown bags - humble testament to suburbia, or ter- 
minal geek gear? Insulated lunch bags - hip way to save the 
planet, or sign of an overinvolved mother? Buying is the only 
solution. And it gives me time to scan the cafeteria for a 
friendly face or an inconspicuous corner. 
The hot lunch is turkey with reconstituted dried mashed pota- 
toes and gravy, a damp green vegetable, and a cookie. I'm not 
sure how to order anything else, so I just slide my tray along 
and let the lunch drones fill it. This eight-foot senior in front 
of me somehow gets three cheeseburgers, French fries, and 
two Ho-Hos without saying a word. Some sort of Morse code 
with his eyes, maybe. Must study this further. I follow the Bas- 
ketball Pole into the cafeteria. 

I see a few friends - people I used to think were my friends - but 
they look away. Think fast, think fast. There's that new girl, 
Heather, reading by the window. I could sit across from her. Or I 
could crawl behind a trash can. Or maybe I could dump my lunch 
straight into the trash and keep moving right on out the door. 

The Basketball Pole waves to a table of friends. Of course. 
The basketball team. They all swear at him - a bizarre greet- 
ing practiced by athletic boys with zits. He smiles and throws 
a Ho-Ho. I try to scoot around him. 

Thwap! A lump of potatoes and gravy hits me square in the 
center of my chest. All conversation stops as the entire lunch- 
room gawks, my face burning into their retinas. I will be for- 
ever known as "that girl who got nailed by potatoes the first 
day." The Basketball Pole apologizes and says something else, 
but four hundred people explode in laughter and I can't read 
lips. I ditch my tray and bolt for the door. 

I motor so fast out of the lunchroom the track coach would 
draft me for varsity if he were around. But no, Mr. Neck has 
cafeteria duty. And Mr. Neck has no use for girls who can run 
the one hundred in under ten seconds, unless they're willing to 
do it while holding on to a football. 

Mr. Neck: "We meet again." 

Me: 

Would he listen to "I need to go home and change," or "Did you 
see what that bozo did"? Not a chance. I keep my mouth shut. 

Mr. Neck: "Where do you think you're going?" 

Me: 

It is easier not to say anything. Shut your trap, button your 
lip, can it. All that crap you hear on TV about communication 
and expressing feelings is a lie. Nobody really wants to hear 
what you have to say. 

Mr. Neck makes a note in his book. "I knew you were trouble 
the first time I saw you. I've taught here for twenty-four years 
and I can tell what's going on in a kid's head just by looking in 
their eyes. No more warnings. You just earned a demerit for 
wandering the halls without a pass." 



SANCTUARY 

Art follows lunch, like dream follows nightmare. The class- 
room is at the far end of the building and has long, 
south-facing windows. The sun doesn't shine much in Syr- 
acuse, so the art room is designed to get every bit of light 
it can. It is dusty in a clean-dirt kind of way. The floor is 
layered with dry splotches of paint, the walls plastered 
with sketches of tormented teenagers and fat puppies, the 
shelves crowded with clay pots. A radio plays my favorite 
station. 

Mr. Freeman is ugly. Big old grasshopper body, like a stilt- 
walking circus guy. Nose like a credit card sunk between his 
eyes. But he smiles at us as we file into class. 

He is hunched over a spinning pot, his hands muddy red. 
"Welcome to the only class that will teach you how to sur- 
vive," he says. "Welcome to Art." 

I sit at a table close to his desk. Ivy is in this class. She sits by 
the door. I keep staring at her, trying to make her look at me. 
That happens in movies - people can feel it when other people 
stare at them and they just have to turn around and say some- 
thing. Either Ivy has a great force field, or my laser vision isn't 
very strong. She won't look back at me. I wish I could sit with 
her. She knows art. 

Mr. Freeman turns off the wheel and grabs a piece of chalk 
without washing his hands. "SOUL," he writes on the board. 
The clay streaks the word like dried blood. "This is where you 
can find your soul, if you dare. Where you can touch that part 
of you that you've never dared look at before. Do not come 
here and ask me to show you how to draw a face. Ask me to 
help you find the wind." 

I sneak a peek behind me. The eyebrow telegraph is flashing 
fast. This guy is weird. He must see it, he must know what we 
are thinking. He keeps on talking. He says we will graduate 
knowing how to read and write because we'll spend a million 
hours learning how to read and write. (I could argue that 
point.) 

Mr. Freeman: "Why not spend that time on art: painting, 
sculpting, charcoal, pastel, oils? Are words or numbers more 
important than images? Who decided this? Does algebra move 
you to tears?" (Hands raise, thinking he wants answers.) 
"Can the plural possessive express the feelings in your heart? 
If you don't learn art now, you will never learn to breathe!!!" 

There is more. For someone who questions the value of 
words, he sure uses a lot of them. I tune out for a while and 
come back when he holds up a huge globe that is missing half 
of the Northern Hemisphere. "Can anyone tell me what this 
is?" he asks. "A globe?" ventures a voice in the back. Mr. 
Freeman rolls his eyes. "Was it an expensive sculpture that 
some kid dropped and he had to pay for it out of his own 
money or they didn't let him graduate?" asks another. 

Mr. Freeman sighs. "No imagination. What are you, thirteen? 
Fourteen? You've already let them beat your creativity out of 
you! This is an old globe I used to let my daughters kick 
around my studio when it was too wet to play outside. One 
day Jenny put her foot right through Texas, and the United 
States crumbled into the sea. And voila - an idea! This broken 
ball could be used to express such powerful visions - you 
could paint a picture of it with people fleeing from the hole, 
with a wet-muzzled dog chewing Alaska - the opportunities 
are endless. It's almost too much, but you are important 
enough to give it to." 

Huh? 

"You will each pick a piece of paper out of the globe." He 
walks around the room so we can pull red scraps from the 
center of the earth. "On the paper you will find one word, the 
name of an object. I hope you like it. You will spend the rest 
of the year learning how to turn that object into a piece of art. 
You will sculpt it. You will sketch it, papier-mache it, carve it. 
If the computer teacher is talking to me this year, you can use 
the lab for computer-aided designs. But there's a catch - by the 
end of the year, you must figure out how to make your object 
say something, express an emotion, speak to every person 
who looks at it." 

Some people groan. My stomach flutters. Can he really let us 
do this? It sounds like too much fun. He stops at my table. I 
plunge my hand into the bottom of the globe and fish out my 
paper. "Tree." Tree? It's too easy. I learned how to draw a tree 
in second grade. I reach in for another piece of paper. Mr. 
Freeman shakes his head. "Ah-ah-ah," he says. "You just 
chose your destiny, you can't change that." 

He pulls a bucket of clay from under the pottery wheel, 
breaks off fist-sized balls, and tosses one to each of us. 
Then he turns up the radio and laughs. "Welcome to the 
journey." 



ESPANOL 



My Spanish teacher is going to try to get through the entire 
year without speaking English to us. This is both amusing and 
useful - makes it much easier to ignore her. She communicates 
through exaggerated gestures and playacting. It's like taking a 
class in charades. She says a sentence in Spanish and puts the 
back of her hand to her forehead. "You have a fever!" some- 
one from class calls out. She shakes her head no, and repeats 
the gesture. "You feel faint!" No. She goes out to the hall, 
then bursts through the door, looking busy and distracted. She 
turns to us, acts surprised to see us, then does the bit with the 
back of the hand to the forehead. "You're lost!" "You're an- 
gry!" "You're in the wrong school!" "You're in the wrong 
country!" "You're on the wrong planet!" 

She tries one more time and smacks herself so hard on the 
forehead she staggers a bit. Her forehead is as pink as her lip- 
stick. The guesses continue. "You can't believe how many kids 
are in this class!" "You forgot how to speak Spanish!" "You 
have a migraine!" "You're going to have a migraine if we 
don't figure it out!" 

In desperation, she writes a sentence in Spanish on the board: 
Me sorprende que estoy tan cansada hoy. No one knows what 
it says. We don't understand Spanish - that's why we're here. 
Finally, some brain gets out the Spanish-English dictionary. 
We spend the rest of the period trying to translate the sen- 
tence. When the bell rings, we have gotten as far as "To ex- 
haust the day to surprise." 



HOME. WORK. 

I make it through the first two weeks of school without a nu- 
clear meltdown. Heather from Ohio sits with me at lunch and 
calls to talk about English homework. She can talk for hours. 
All I have to do is prop the phone against my ear and "uh- 
huh" occasionally while I surf the cable. Rachel and every 
other person I've known for nine years continue to ignore me. 
I'm getting bumped a lot in the halls. A few times my books 
were accidentally ripped from my arms and pitched to the 
floor. I try not to dwell on it. It has to go away eventually. 

At first, Mom was pretty good about preparing dinners in the 
morning and sticking them in the fridge, but I knew it would 
end. I come home to a note that says, "Pizza. 555-4892. Small 
tip this time." Clipped to the note is a twenty-dollar bill. My 
family has a good system. We communicate with notes on the 
kitchen counter. I write when I need school supplies or a ride 
to the mall. They write what time they'll be home from work 
and if I should thaw anything. What else is there to say? 

Mom is having staff problems again. My mother manages Ef- 
fert's, a clothing store downtown. Her boss offered her the 
branch at the mall, but she didn't want it. I think she likes 
watching the reaction when she says she works in the city. 
"Aren't you afraid?" people ask. "I would never work there in 
a million years." Mom loves doing the things that other peo- 
ple are afraid of. She could have been a snake handler. 

But the downtown location makes it hard to find people to 
work for her. Daily shoplifters, bums peeing on the front door, 
and the occasional armed robbery discourage job seekers. Go 
figure. We are now two weeks into September and she's al- 
ready thinking Christmas. She has plastic snowflakes and red- 
felt-wearing Santas on the brain. If she can't find enough 
employees for September, she'll be in deep doo-doo when the 
holiday season hits. 

I order my dinner at 3:10 and eat it on the white couch. I 
don't know which parent was having seizures when they 
bought that couch. The trick to eating on it is to turn the 
messy side of the cushions up. The couch has two personali- 
ties: "Melinda inhaling pepperoni and mushroom" and "No 
one ever eats in the family room, no ma'am." I chow and 
watch TV until I hear Dad's Jeep in the driveway. Flip, flip, 
flip - cushions reversed to show their pretty white cheeks, 
then bolt upstairs. By the time Dad unlocks the door, every- 
thing looks the way he wants to see it, and I have vanished. 

My room belongs to an alien. It is a postcard of who I was in 
fifth grade. I went through a demented phase when I thought 
that roses should cover everything and pink was a great color. 
It was all Rachel's fault. She begged her mom to let her do her 
room over, so we all ended up with new rooms. Nicole refused 
to put the stupid little skirt around her nightstand and Ivy had 
gone way over the top, as usual. Jessica did hers in a desert 'n' 
cowdudes theme. My room was stuck in the middle, a bit 
stolen from everyone else. The only things that were really 
mine were my stuffed-rabbit collection from when I was a lit- 
tle kid and my canopy bed. No matter how much Nicole 
teased me, I wouldn't take the canopy down. I'm thinking 
about changing the rose wallpaper, but then Mom would get 
involved and Dad would measure the walls and they would 
argue about paint color. I don't know what I want it to look 
like, anyway. 

Homework is not an option. My bed is sending out serious 
nap rays. I can't help myself. The fluffy pillows and warm 
comforter are more powerful than I am. I have no choice but 
to snuggle under the covers. 

I hear Dad turn on the television. Clink, clink, clink - he 
drops ice cubes in a heavy-bottomed glass and pours in some 
booze. He opens the microwave - for the pizza, I guess - 
slams it closed, then beep-beeps the timer. I turn on my radio 
so he'll know I'm home. I won't take a real nap. I have this 
halfway place, a rest stop on the road to sleep, where I can 
stay for hours. I don't even need to close my eyes, just stay 
safe under the covers and breathe. 

Dad turns up the volume on the TV. The news-team anchor- 
dude bellows, "Five dead in house fire! Young girl attacked! 
Teens suspected in gas station holdup!" I nibble on a scab on 
my lower lip. Dad hops from channel to channel, watching 
the same stories play over and over. 

I watch myself in the mirror across the room. Ugh. My hair is 
completely hidden under the comforter. I look for the shapes 
in my face. Could I put a face in my tree, like a dryad from 
Greek mythology? Two muddy-circle eyes under black-dash 
eyebrows, piggy-nose nostrils, and a chewed-up horror of a 
mouth. Definitely not a dryad face. I can't stop biting my lips. 
It looks like my mouth belongs to someone else, someone I 
don't even know. 

I get out of bed and take down the mirror. I put it in the back 
of my closet, facing the wall. 



OUR FEARLESS LEADER 

I'm hiding in the bathroom, waiting for the coast to 
clear. I peek out the door. Principal Principal spots another 
errant student in the hall. 

Principal Principal: "Where's your late pass, mister?" 

Errant Student: "I'm on my way to get one now." 

PP: "But you can't be in the hall without a pass." 

ES: "I know, I'm so upset. That's why I need to hurry, so I can 
get a pass." 

Principal Principal pauses with a look on his face like Daffy 
Duck's when Bugs is pulling a fast one. 

PP: "Well, hurry up, then, and get that pass." 

Errant Student races down hall, waving and smiling. Principal 
Principal walks the other way, replaying the conversation in 
his mind, trying to figure out what went wrong. I ponder this 
and laugh. 



FIZZ ED 
Gym should be illegal. It is humiliating. 

My gym locker is closest to the door, which means I have to 
change my clothes in a bathroom stall. Heather from Ohio 
has the locker next to mine. She wears her gym clothes under 
her regular clothes. After gym she changes out of her shorts 
but always leaves an undershirt on. It makes me worry about 
the girls in Ohio. Do they all have to wear undershirts? 

The only other girl I know in gym is Nicole. In our old clan, we 
had never been very close. She almost said something to me 
when school started, but instead looked down and retied her 
Nikes. Nicole has a full-length locker in a discreet, fresh-smelling 
alcove because she's on the soccer team. She doesn't mind chang- 
ing her clothes in public. She even changes bras, wearing one 
sports bra to regular class and another to gym class. Never 
blushes or turns around to hide herself, just changes her clothes. 
Must be a jock thing. If you're that strong, you don't care if 
people make comments about your boobs or rear end. 

It's late September and we're starting our field hockey unit. 
Field hockey is a mud sport, played only on wet, cloudy days 



18 



when it feels like snow. Who dreamed up this one? Nicole is 
unstoppable at field hockey. She motors downfield so fast she 
creates a wake of flowing mud that washes over anyone who 
gets in her way. She does something with her wrist, then 
the ball is in the goal. She smiles and jogs back to the center 
circle. 

Nicole can do anything that involves a ball and a whistle. Bas- 
ketball, Softball, lacrosse, football, soccer, rugby. Anything. 
And she makes it look easy. Boys watch her to learn how to 
play better. It doesn't hurt that she's cute. She chipped her 
tooth this past summer at some kind of jock camp. Makes her 
look even cuter. 

The gym teachers have a special place in their hearts for 
Nicole. She shows Potential. They look at her and see future 
State Championships. Pay raises. One day she scored 35 goals 
before my team threatened to walk off the field. The gym 
teacher made her the referee. Not only did my team lose, but 
four girls went to the nurse with injuries. Nicole doesn't be- 
lieve in the concept of fouling. She comes from the "play till 
death or maiming" school of athletics. 

It it weren't for her attitude, it would be easier to deal with all 
this. The crappy locker I have, Heather geeking around me 
like a moth, cold mornings in the mud watching Nicole, War- 
rior Princess, listening to the coaches praise her - I could just 
accept it and move on. But Nicole is so friendly. She even talks 
to Heather from Ohio. She told Heather where to buy a 
mouth guard so her braces wouldn't cut up her lips if she got 
I in with a ball. Heather now wants to buy a sports bra. Nicole 
is just not a bitch. It would be so much easier to hate her if 
she were. 



FRIENDS 

Rachel is with me in the bathroom. Edit that. Rachelle is with 
me in the bathroom. She has changed her name. Rachelle is 
reclaiming her European heritage by hanging out with the 
foreign-exchange students. After five weeks in school, she can 
swear in French. She wears black stockings with runs and 
doesn't shave under her arms. She waves her hand in the air 
and you find yourself thinking of young chimpanzees. 

I can't believe she was my best friend. 

I'm in the bathroom trying to put my right contact lens back 
in. She's smudging mascara under her eyes to look exhausted 
and wan. I think about running out so she can't pull the evil 
eye on me again, but Hairwoman, my English teacher, is pa- 
trolling the hall and I forgot to go to her class. 

Me: "Hi." 

Rachelle: "Mmm." 

Now what? I'm going to be completely, totally cool, like noth- 
ing has happened. Think ice. Think snow. 

\\&gt; i low s it going." I try to put in my contact, and poke 
ins .(II 111 die eye. Very cool. 

Rachelle: "Eehn." She gets mascara in her eye and rubs it, 
smearing mascara across her face. 

I don't want to be cool. I want to grab her by the neck and 
shake her and scream at her to stop treating me like dirt. She 
didn't even bother to find out the truth - what kind of friend 
is that? My contact folds in half under my eyelid. Tears well in 
my right eye. 

Me: "Ouch." 

Rachelle: [Snorts. Stands back from mirror, turns head from 
side to side to admire the black mess that looks like goose 
poop across her cheekbones] "Pas mat." 

She puts a candy cigarette between her lips. Rachelle wants 
desperately to smoke, but she has asthma. She has started a 
new Thing, unheard of in a ninth-grader. Candy cigarettes. 
The exchange students love it. Next thing you know, she'll be 
drinking black coffee and reading books without pictures. 

An exchange student flushes and comes out of the stall. This 
one looks like a supermodel with a name like Greta or Ingrid. 
Is America the only country with dumpy teenagers? She says 
something foreign and Rachelle laughs. Right, like she under- 
stood 

Me: 

Rachelle blows a candy cigarette smoke ring at my face. Blows 
me off. I have been dropped like a hot Pop Tart on a cold 
kitchen floor. Rachelle and Greta-Ingrid glide out of the bath- 
room. Neither one of them has toilet paper stuck to her boots. 
Where is the justice? 

I need a new friend. I need a friend, period. Not a true friend, 
nothing close or share clothes or sleepover giggle giggle yak 
yak. Just a pseudo-friend, disposable friend. Friend as acces- 
sory. Just so I don't feel and look so stupid. 

My journal entry for the day: "Exchange students are ruining 
our country." 



HEATHERING 

As we ride home on Heather's bus, she tries to bully me into 
joining a club. She has a Plan. She wants us to join five clubs, 
one for every day of the week. The tricky part is choosing the 
clubs that have the Right People. Latin Club is out of the ques- 
tion, as is Bowling. Heather actually likes bowling - it was a big 
thing in her old school - but she has seen our bowling lanes and 
she could tell that no Right Person would set foot in there. 

When we get to Heather's house, her mother meets us at the 
door. She wants to hear all about our day, how long I've lived 
in town, and asks little sideways questions about my parents, 
so she can figure out if I'm the kind of friend she wants for her 
daughter. I don't mind. I think it's nice that she cares. 

We can't go in Heather's room because the decorators aren't 
finished. Armed with a bowl of orange popcorn and diet so- 
das, we retreat to the basement. The decorators finished that 
first. You can hardly tell it's a basement. It's covered in carpet- 
ing nicer than we have in our living room. A monster TV 
glows in a corner, and there's a pool table and exercise equip- 
ment. It doesn't even smell like a basement. 

Heather hops on the treadmill and resumes scheming. She 
isn't finished with her survey of Merryweather's social scene, 
but she thinks the International Club and the Select Chorus 
will be a good place to start. Maybe we can try out for the 
musical. I turn on the television and eat her popcorn. 

Heather: "What should we do? What do you want to join? 
Maybe we should tutor at the elementary school." She in- 
creases the speed of the treadmill. "What about your friends 
from last year? Don't you know Nicole? But she does all those 
sports, doesn't she? I could never do sports. I fall down too 
easy. What do you want to do?" 

Me: "Nothing. The clubs are stupid. Want some popcorn?" 

She edges up the treadmill speed and breaks into a sprint. The 
treadmill is so loud I can hardly hear the television. Heather 
wags her finger at me. Hanging back is a common mistake 
most ninth-graders make, she says. I shouldn't be intimidated. 
I have to get involved, become a part of the school. That's 
what all the popular people do. She turns down the treadmill 
and wipes her brow with a thick towel that hangs off the side 
of the machine. After a few minutes of cooling down, she 
hops off. "A hundred calories," she crows. "Want to try?" 

I shudder and hold out the popcorn bowl to her. She reaches 
right past me and takes a pen topped with a Merryweather 
Purple ball of fluff off the coffee table. "We must make 
plans," she says solemnly. She draws four boxes, one for each 
marking period, then writes "GOALS" in each box. "We won't 
get anywhere without knowing our goals. Everyone always 
says that and it is so true." She opens her soda. "What are 
your goals, Mel?" 

I used to be like Heather. Have 1 changed that much in two 
months? She is happy, driven, aerobically fit. She has a nice 
mom and an awesome television. But she's like a dog that 
keeps jumping into your lap. She always walks with me down 
the halls chattering a million miles a minute. 

My goal is to go home and take a nap. 



BURROW 

Yesterday Hairwoman yanked me from study hall and forced 
me to make up my "missing" homework in her room. (She 
made fluttering noises of concern and mentioned a meeting 
with my parents. Not good.) Nobody bothered to tell me that 
study hall was being held in the library today. By the time I 
find it, the period is almost over. I'm dead. I try to explain to 
the librarian, but I keep stuttering and nothing comes out 
right. 

Librarian: "Calm down, calm down. It's OK. Don't get upset. 
You are Melinda Sordino, right? Don't worry. I'll mark you 
present. Let me show you how it works. If you think you're 
going to be late, just ask a teacher for a late pass. See? No 
need for tears." 

She holds up a small green pad - my get-out-of-j ail-free cards. 
I smile and try to choke out a "thank you," but can't say any- 
thing. She thinks I'm overcome with emotion because she 
didn't bust me. Close enough. There's not enough time for a 
nap, so I check out a stack of books to make the librarian 
happy. I might even read one. 

I don't come up with my brilliant idea right then and there. It 
is born when Mr. Neck tracks me through the cafeteria, de- 
manding my "Twenty Ways the Iroquois Survived in the For- 
est" homework. I pretend that I don't see him. I cut through 
the lunch line, loop around a couple making out by the door, 
and start down a hall. Mr. Neck stops to break up the PDA. I 
head for the Seniors' Wing. 

I am in foreign territory where No Freshman Ffas Gone Be- 
fore. I don't have time to worry about the looks I'm getting. I 
can hear Mr. Neck. I turn a corner, open a door, and step into 
darkness. I hold the doorknob, but Mr. Neck doesn't touch it. 
I hear his footsteps lumber down the hall. I feel the wall next 
to the door until I find a light switch. I haven't stumbled into 
a classroom; it is an old janitor's closet that smells like sour 
sponges. 

The back wall has built-in shelves filled with dusty textbooks 
and a few bottles of bleach. A stained armchair and an old- 
fashioned desk peek from behind a collection of mops and 
brooms. A cracked mirror tilts over a sink littered with dead 
roaches crocheted together with cobwebs. The taps are so 
rusted they don't turn. No janitor has chilled in this closet for 
a very long time. They have a new lounge and supply room by 
the loading dock. All the girls avoid it because of the way they 
stare and whistle softly when we walk by. This closet is aban- 
doned - it has no purpose, no name. It is the perfect place for 
me. 

I steal a pad of late passes from Hairwoman's desk. I feel 
much, much better. 



DEVILS DESTROY 

Not only is the Homecoming pep rally going to spring me 
from algebra, it will be a great time to clean up my closet. I 
brought some sponges from home. No need to goof off in 
filth. I want to smuggle in a blanket and some potpourri, too. 

My plan is to walk toward the auditorium with the rest of the 
crowd, then duck in a bathroom until the coast is clear. I 
would have made it past the teachers with no problem, but I 
forgot to factor in Heather. Just as the Escape Bathroom 
comes into sight, Heather calls my name, runs up, and grabs 
my arm. She is bursting with Merry weather Pride, all perk 
and pep and purple. And she assumes I am just as happy and 
excited as she is. We troop down for the brainwashing and she 
can't stop talking. 

Heather: "This is so exciting - a pep rally!! I made extra pom- 
poms. Here, have one. We'll look great during the Wave. I bet 
the freshman class has the most spirit, don't you? I've always 
wanted to go to a pep rally. Can you imagine what it must be 
like to be on the football team and have the whole school sup- 
porting you? That is so powerful. Do you think they'll win 
tonight? They will, I just know they will. It's been a hard sea- 
son so far, but we'll get them going, won't we, Mel?" 

Her enthusiasm makes me itch, but sarcasm would go right 
over her head. It won't kill me to go to the rally. I have some- 
one to sit with - that counts as a step up on the ladder of so- 
cial acceptability. How bad could a rally be? 

I want to stand by the doors, but Heather drags me up into 
the freshman section of the bleachers. "I know these guys," 
she says. "They work with me on the newspaper." 

The newspaper? We have a newspaper? 

She introduces me to a bunch of pale, zitty faces. I vaguely rec- 
ognize a couple; the rest must have gone to the other middle 
school. I curve up the corners of my mouth without biting my 
lips. A small step. Heather beams and hands me a pom-pom. 

I relax an eensy bit. The girl behind me taps me on the shoul- 
der with her long black nails. She had heard Heather intro- 
duce me. "Sordino?" she asks. "You're Melinda Sordino?" 

I turn around. She blows a black bubble and sucks it back 
into her mouth. I nod. Heather waves to a sophomore she 
knows across the gym. The girl pokes me harder. "Aren't you 
the one who called the cops at Kyle Rodgers's party at the end 
of the summer?" 

A block of ice freezes our section of the bleachers. Heads snap 
in my direction with the sound of a hundred paparazzi cam- 
eras. I can't feel my fingers. I shake my head. Another girl 
chimes in. "My brother got arrested at that party. He got fired 
because of the arrest. I can't believe you did that. Asshole." 

You don't understand, my headvoice answers. Too bad she 
can't hear it. My throat squeezes shut, as if two hands of black 
fingernails are clamped on my windpipe. I have worked so 
hard to forget every second of that stupid party, and here I am 
in the middle of a hostile crowd that hates me for what I had 
to do. I can't tell them what really happened. I can't even look 
at that part myself. An animal noise rustles in my stomach. 

Heather moves to pat my pom-pom, but pulls her hand 
back. For a minute she looks like she'll defend me. No, no, 
she won't. It might interfere with her Plan. I close my eyes. 
Breathe breathe breathe. Don't say anything. Breathe. 

The cheerleaders cartwheel into the gym and bellow. The 
crowd stomps the bleachers and roars back. I put my head in 
my hands and scream to let out the animal noise and some of 
that night. No one hears. They are all quite spirited. 

The band staggers through a song and the cheerleaders 
bounce. The Blue Devil mascot earns a standing ovation by 
back-flipping right into the principal. Principal Principal 
smiles and awshucks us. It has only been six weeks since the 
beginning of school. He still has a sense of humor. 

Finally, our own Devils hulk into the gym. The same boys 
who got detention in elementary school for beating the crap 
out of people are now rewarded for it. They call it football. 
The coach introduces the team. I can't tell them apart. Coach 
Disaster holds the microphone too close to his lips, so all we 
hear is the sound of his spitting and breathing. 

The girl behind me jams her knees into my back. They are as 
sharp as her fingernails. I inch forward in my seat and stare 
intently at the team. The girl with the arrested brother leans 
forward. As Heather shakes her pom-poms, the girl yanks my 
hair. I almost climb up the back of the kid in front of me. He 
turns and gives me a dirty look. 

The coach finally hands the wet microphone back to the princi- 
pal, who introduces us to our very own cheerleaders. They slide 
into synchronized splits and the crowd goes nuts. Our cheer- 
leaders are much better at scoring than the football team is. 



CHEERLEADERS 

There are twelve of them: Jennie, Jen, Jenna, Ashley, Aubrey, 
Amber, Colleen, Kaitlin, Marcie, Donner, Blitzen, and Raven. 
Raven is the captain. Blondest of the blondes. 

My parents didn't raise me to be religious. The closest we 
come to worship is the Trinity of Visa, MasterCard, and 
American Express. I think the Merryweather cheerleaders 
confuse me because I missed out on Sunday School. It has to 
be a miracle. There is no other explanation. How else could 
they sleep with the football team on Saturday night and be 
reincarnated as virginal goddesses on Monday? It's as if they 
operate in two realities simultaneously. In one universe, they 
are gorgeous, straight-teethed, long-legged, wrapped in de- 
signer fashions, and given sports cars on their sixteenth birth- 
days. Teachers smile at them and grade them on the curve. 
They know the first names of the staff. They are the Pride of 
the Trojans. Oops - I mean Pride of the Blue Devils. 

In Universe #2, they throw parties wild enough to attract col- 
lege students. They worship the stink of Eau de Jocque. They 
rent beach houses in Canciin during Spring Break and get 
group-rate abortions before the prom. 

But they are so cute. And they cheer on our boys, inciting 
them to violence and, we hope, victory. These are our role 
models - the Girls Who Have It All. I bet none of them ever 
stutter or screw up or feel like their brains are dissolving into 
marshmallow fluff. They all have beautiful lips, carefully out- 
lined in red and polished to a shine. 

When the pep rally ends, I am accidentally knocked down 
three rows of bleachers. If I ever form my own clan, we'll be 
the Anti-Cheerleaders. We will not sit in the bleachers. We will 
wander underneath them and commit mild acts of mayhem. 



THE OPPOSITE OF INSPIRATION 
IS . . . EXPIRATION? 

For a solid week, ever since the pep rally, I've been painting 
watercolors of trees that have been hit by lightning. I try to 
paint them so they are nearly dead, but not totally. Mr. Free- 
man doesn't say a word to me about them. He just raises his 
eyebrows. One picture is so dark you can barely see the tree at 
all. 

We are all floundering. Ivy pulled "Clowns" as her assign- 
ment. She tells Mr. Freeman she hates clowns; a clown scared 
her when she was a little girl and it put her into therapy. Mr. 
Freeman says fear is a great place to begin art. Another girl 
whines that "Brain" is just too gross a subject for her. She 
wants "Kittens" or "Rainbows." 

Mr. Freeman throws his hands in the air. "Enough! Please 
turn your attention to the bookshelves." We dutifully turn and 
stare. Books. This is art class. Why do we need books? "If you 
are stumped, you may take some time to study the masters." 
He pulls out an armful. "Kahlo, Monet, O'Keeffe. Pollock, Pi- 
casso, Dali. They did not complain about subject, they mined 
every subject for the root of its meaning. Of course, they 
didn't have a school board forcing them to paint with both 
hands tied behind their backs, they had patrons who under- 
stood the need to pay for basic things such as paper and 
paint. . . " 

We groan. He's off on the school-board thing again. The 
school board has cut his supply budget, telling him to make 
do with the stuff left over from last year. No new paint, no ex- 
tra paper. He'll rant for the rest of the period, forty-three min- 
utes. The room is warm, filled with sun and paint fumes. 
Three kids fall dead asleep, eye twitches, snores, and every- 
thing. 

I stay awake. I take out a page of notebook paper and a pen 
and doodle a tree, my second-grade version. Hopeless. I crum- 
ple it into a ball and take out another sheet. How hard can 
it be to put a tree on a piece of paper? Two vertical lines for 
the trunk. Maybe some thick branches, a bunch of thinner 
branches, and plenty of leaves to hide the mistakes. I draw a 
horizontal line for the ground and a daisy popping up next to 
the tree. Somehow I don't think Mr. Freeman is going to find 
much emotion in it. I don't find any. He started out as such a 
cool teacher. Is he going to make us thrash around with this 
ridiculous assignment without helping us? 



ACTING 

We get a day off for Columbus Day. I go to Heather's house. I 
wanted to sleep in, but Heather "really, really, really" wanted 
me to come over. There's nothing on television, anyway. 
Heather's mom acts very excited to see me. She makes us 
mugs of hot chocolate to take upstairs and tries to convince 
Heather to invite a whole group for a sleepover. "Maybe Mel- 
lie could bring some of her friends." I don't mention the pos- 
sibility that Rachel would slit my throat on her new carpet. I 
show my teeth like a good girl. Her mother pats my cheek. I 
am getting better at smiling when people expect it. 

Heather's room is finished and ready for viewing. It does not 
look like a fifth-grader's. Or a ninth-grader's. It looks like a 
commercial for vacuum cleaners, all fresh paint and vacuum- 
cleaner lines in the carpet. The lilac walls have a few artsy 
prints on them. Her bookcase has glass doors. She has a tele- 
vision and a phone, and her homework is neatly laid out on 
her desk. Her closet is opened just a tad. I open it farther with 
my foot. All her clothes wait patiently on hangers, organized 
by type - skirts together, pants hanging by their cuffs, her 
sweaters stacked in plastic bags on shelves. The room screams 
Heather. Why can't I figure out how to do that? Not that I 
want my room screaming "Heather!" - that would be too 
creepy. But a little whisper of "Melinda" would be nice. I sit 
on the floor flipping through her CDs. Heather paints her 
nails on her desk blotter and blathers. She is determined to 
sign up for the musical. The Music Wingers are a hard clan to 
break into. Heather doesn't have talent or connections - I tell 
her she is wasting her time to even think of it. She thinks we 
should try out together. I think she has been breathing too 
much hairspray. My job is to nod or shake my head, to say "I 
know what you mean," when I don't, and "That is so unfair," 
when it isn't. 

The musical would be easy for me. I am a good actor. I have 
a whole range of smiles. I use the shy, look-up-through-the- 
bangs smile for staff members, and the crinkly-eye smile with 
a quick shake of my head if a teacher asks me for an answer. 
If my parents want to know how school went, I flash my eye- 
brows upward and shrug my shoulders. When people point at 
me or whisper as I walk past, I wave to imaginary friends 
down the hall and hurry to meet them. If I drop out of high 
school, I could be a mime. 

Heather asks why I don't think they would let us in the musi- 
cal. I sip my hot chocolate. It burns the roof of my mouth. 

Me: "We are nobody." 

Heather: "How can you say that? Why does everyone have 
that attitude? I don't understand any of this. If we want to be 
in the musical, then they should let us. We could just stand on- 
stage or something if they don't like our singing. It's not fair. I 
hate high school." 

She pushes her books to the floor and knocks the green nail 
polish on the sand-colored carpet. "Why is it so hard to make 
friends here? Is there something in the water? In my old 
school I could have gone out for the musical and worked on 
the newspaper and chaired the car wash. Here people don't 
even know I exist. I get squished in the hall and I don't belong 
anywhere and nobody cares. And you're no help. You are so 
negative and you never try anything, you just mope around 
like you don't care that people talk about you behind your 
back." 

She flops on her bed and bursts into sobs. Big boohoos, with 
little squeals of frustration when she punches her teddy bear. I 
don't know what to do. I try to soak up the nail polish, but I 
make the stain bigger. It looks like algae. Heather wipes her 
nose on the bear's plaid scarf. I slip out to the bathroom and 
come back with another box of tissues and a bottle of nail- 
polish remover. 

Heather: "I am so sorry, Mellie. I can't believe I said those 
things to you. It's PMS, don't pay any attention to me. You 
have been so sweet to me. You are the only person I can 
trust." She blows her nose loudly and wipes her eyes on her 
sleeve. "Look at you. You're just like my mom. She says 'No 
use crying, just get on with your life.' I know what we'll do. 
First, we'll work our way into a good group. We'll make them 
like us. By next year, the Music Wingers will be begging us to 
be in the musical." 

It is the most hopeless idea I have ever heard, but I nod and 
pour the remover on the carpet. It lightens the polish to a 
bright vomit green and bleaches the carpet surrounding it. 
When Heather sees what I have done, she bursts into tears 
again, sobbing that it isn't my fault. My stomach is killing me. 
Her room isn't big enough for this much emotion. I leave 
without saying goodbye. 



DINNER THEATER 

The Parents are making threatening noises, turning dinner 
into performance art, with Dad doing his Arnold Schwarze- 
negger imitation and Mom playing Glenn Close in one of her 
psycho roles. I am the Victim. 

Mom: [creepy smile] "Thought you could put one over on us, 
did you, Melinda? Big high school student now, don't need to 
show your homework to your parents, don't need to show 
any failing test grades?" 

Dad: [Bangs table, silverware jumps] "Cut the crap. She 
knows what's up. The interim reports came today. Listen to 
me, young lady. I'm only going to say this once. You get those 
grades up or your name is mud. Hear me? Get them up!" [At- 
tacks baked potato.] 

Mom: [annoyed at being upstaged] "I'll handle this. Melinda. 
[She smiles. Audience shudders] We're not asking for much, 
dear. We just want you to do your best. And we know your 
best is much better than this. You tested so well, dear. Look at 
me when I talk to you." 

[Victim mixes cottage cheese into applesauce. Dad snorts like 
a bull. Mom grasps knife.] 

Mom: "I said look at me." 

[Victim mixes peas into applesauce and cottage cheese. Dad 
stops eating.] 

Mom: "Look at me now." 

This is the Death Voice, the Voice that means business. When 
I was a kid, this Voice made me pee in my pants. It takes more 
now. 1 look Mom square in the eye, then rinse my plate and 
retreat to my room. Deprived of Victim, Mom and Dad holler 
at each other. I turn up my music to drown out the noise. 



BLUE ROSES 

After last night's interrogation, I try to pay attention in biol- 
ogy. We are studying cells, which have all these tiny parts you 
can't see unless you look at them under a microscope. We get 
to use real microscopes, not plastic Kmart specials. It's not 
bad. 

Ms. Keen is our teacher. I feel kind of sad for her. She could 
have been a famous scientist or doctor or something. Instead, 
she's stuck with us. She has wooden boxes all over the front of 
the room that she climbs on when she talks to us. If she'd cut 
back on the doughnuts, she'd look like a tiny grandmother 
doll. Instead, she has a gelatinous figure, usually encased in 
orange polyester. She avoids basketball players. From their 
perspective, she must look like a basketball. 

I have a lab partner, David Petrakis. Belongs to the Cyber- 
genius clan. He has the potential to be cute when the braces 
come off. He is so brilliant he makes the teachers nervous. 
You'd think a kid like that would get beat up a lot, but the bad 
guys leave him alone. I have to find out his secret. David ig- 
nores me mostly, except when I almost ruined the $300 micro- 
scope by twisting the knob the wrong way. That was the day 
Ms. Keen wore a purple dress with bright blue roses. Baffling. 
They shouldn't let teachers change like that without some kind 
of Early Warning Alert. It shakes up the students. That dress 
was all anyone talked about for days. She hasn't worn it since. 



STUDENT DIVIDED BY CONFUSION 
EQUALS ALGEBRA 

I slide into my desk with ten minutes left in algebra class. Mr. 
Stetman stares at my late pass for a long time. I pull out a 
clean sheet of paper so I can copy the problems off the board. 

I sit in the back row, where I can keep my eye on everyone, as 
well as whatever is going on in the parking lot. 1 think of my- 
self as the Emergency Warning System of the class. I plan dis- 
aster drills. How would we escape if the chemistry lab exploded? 
What if an earthquake hit Central New York? A tornado? 

It is impossible to stay focused on algebra. It's not that I'm 
bad at math. I tested at the top of the class last year - that's 
how I got Dad to pay for my new bike. Math is easy because 
there is no room for debate. The answer is right or it is wrong. 
Give me a sheet of math problems and I'll get 98 percent of 
them right. 

But I can't get my head around algebra. I knew why I had to 
memorize my multiplication tables. Understanding fractions, 
and decimals, and percentages, and even geometry - all that 
was practical. Toolz eye kan youz. It made so much sense I 
never thought about it. I did the work. Made honor roll. 

But algebra? Every single day, someone asks Mr. Stetman why 
we have to learn algebra. You can tell this causes him great 
personal pain. Mr. Stetman loves algebra. He is poetic about 
it, in an integral-number sort of way. He talks about algebra 
the way some guys talk about their cars. Ask him why 
algebra and he launches into a thousand and one stories why 
algebra. None of them makes sense. 

Mr. Stetman asks if anyone can explain the wangdiddler's role 
in the negative hotchka theorem. Heather has the answer. She 
is wrong. Stetman tries again. Me? I shake my head with a sad 
smile. Not this time, try me again in twenty years. He calls me 
to the board. 

Mr. Stetman: "Who wants to help Melinda understand how 
we work our way through this problem? Rachel? Great." 

My head explodes with the noise of fire trucks leaving the sta- 
tion. This is a real disaster. Rachel/Rachelle clogs up to the 
board, dressed in an outrageous Dutch/Scandinavian ensem- 
ble. She looks half-cute, half-sophisticated. She has red laser 
eyes that burn my forehead. I wear basic Dumpster togs - 
smelly gray turtleneck and jeans. I just this minute remember 
that I need to wash my hair. 

Rachelle's mouth moves and her hand glides over the board, 
drawing funny shapes and numbers. I pull my lower lip all the 
way in between my teeth. If I try hard enough, maybe I can 
gobble my whole self this way. Mr. Stetman drones something 
and Rachelle flutters her eyelids. She nudges me. We are sup- 
posed to sit down. The class giggles as we walk back to our 
seats. I didn't try hard enough to swallow myself. 

My brain doesn't think we should spend any time hanging 
around algebra. We have better things to think about. It's a 
shame. Mr. Stetman seems like a nice guy. 



HALLOWEEN 

My parents declare that I am too old to go trick-or-treating. 
I'm thrilled. This way I don't have to admit that no one in- 
vited me to go with them. I'm not about to tell Mom and Dad 
that. To keep up appearances, I stomp to my room and slam 
the door. 

I look out my window. A group of little creatures is coming up 
the walk. A pirate, a dinosaur, two fairies, and a bride. Why is 
it that you never see a kid dressed as a groom on Halloween? 
Their parents chat at the curb. The night is dangerous, parents 
are required - tall ghosts in khakis and down jackets floating 
behind the children. 

The doorbell rings. My parents squabble about who will an- 
swer it. Then Mom swears and opens the door with a high- 
pitched "Ooooh, who do we have here?" She must have 
handed out only one mini-chocolate bar to each creature - 
their thank-yous do not sound enthusiastic. The kids cut 
through the yard to the next house and their parents follow in 
the street. 

Last year, our clan all dressed up as witches. We went to Ivy's 
house because she and her older sister had theatrical makeup. 
We traded clothes and splurged on cheap black wigs. Rachel 
and I looked the best. We had used baby-sitting money to rent 
black satin capes lined in red. We rocked. It was an unusually 
warm, wicked evening. We didn't need long underwear and 
the sky was clear. The wind kicked up, skimming clouds over 
the surface of the full moon, which was hung just to make us 
feel powerful and strong. We raced through the night, a clan 
of untouchable witches. I actually thought for a moment that 
we could cast spells, could turn people into frogs or rabbits, 
to punish the evil and reward the good. We ended up with 
pounds of candy. After Ivy's parents went to bed, we lit a 
candle in the totally dark house. We held it in front of an 
antique mirror at midnight to see our futures. I couldn't see 
anything. 

This year Rachelle is going to a party thrown by one of the 
exchange students' host families. I heard her talk about it in 
algebra. I knew I wouldn't get an invitation. I would be lucky 
to get an invitation to my own funeral, with my reputation. 
Heather is walking with some of the little kids in her neigh- 
borhood so their mothers can stay home. 

I am prepared. I refuse to spend the night moping in my room 
or listening to my parents argue. I checked out a book from 
the library, Dracula, by Bram Stoker. Cool name. I settle into 
my nest with a bag of candy corn and the blood-sucking mon- 
ster. 



NAME NAME NAME 

In a post-Halloween frenzy, the school board has come out 
against calling us the Devils. We are now the Merryweather 
Tigers. Roar. 

The Ecology Club is planning a rally to protest the "degrading 
of an endangered species." This is the only thing talked about 
at school. Especially during class. Mr. Neck has a steroid rage, 
screaming about Motivation and Identity and sacred School 
Spirit. We won't even make it to the Industrial Revolution at 
this rate. 

I get hosed in Spanish. "Linda" means "pretty" in Spanish. 
This is a great joke. Mrs. Spanish Teacher calls my name. 
Some stand-up comic cracks, "No, Melinda no es linda." 

They call me Me-no-linda for the rest of the period. This is 
how terrorists get started, this kind of harmless fun. I wonder 
if it's too late to transfer to German. 

I just thought of a great theory that explains everything. 
When I went to that party, I was abducted by aliens. They 
have created a fake Earth and fake high school to study me 
and my reactions. This certainly explains cafeteria food. Not 
the other stuff, though. The aliens have a sick sense of humor. 



THE MARTHAS 

Heather has found a clan - the Marthas. She is a freshman 
member on probation. I have no idea how she did it. I suspect 
money changed hands. This is part of her strategy to make a 
place for herself at school. I am supposed to be tagging along. 
But the Marthas! 

It's an expensive clan to run with; outfits must be coordinated, 
crisp, and seasonally appropriate. They favor plaid for au- 
tumn with matching sweaters in colors named after fruit, like 
apricot and russet apple. Winter calls for Fair Isle sweaters, 
lined wool pants, and Christmas hair ornaments. They haven't 
told her what to buy for spring. I predict skirts with geese and 
white blouses with embroidered ducks on the collar. 

I tell Heather she should push the fashion envelope just a 
teeny bit to be an ironic reflection of the 1950s, you know, in- 
nocence and apple pie. She doesn't think the Clan Leaders, 
Meg 'n' Emily 'n' Siobhan, understand irony. They like rules 
too much. 

Marthas are big on helping. The name of their group came 
from somebody in the Bible (the original Martha Clan Leader 
became a missionary in Los Angeles). But now they follow the 
Other Martha, Saint Martha of the Glue Gun, the lady who 
writes books about cheery decorations. Very Connecticut, very 
prep. The Marthas tackle projects and perform good deeds. 
This is ideal Heather work. She says they run the canned-food 
drive, tutor kids in the city, host a walkathon, a danceathon, 
and a rockingchairathon to raise money for I don't know 
what. They also Do Nice Things for teachers. Gag. 

Heather's first Martha Project is to decorate the faculty lounge 
for a Thanksgiving party/faculty meeting. She corners me after 
Spanish and begs me to help her. She thinks the Marthas have 
given her a deliberately impossible job so they can dump her. 
I've always wondered what the staff room looks like. You 
hear so many rumors. Will it have a cot for teachers who need 
naps? Economy-sized boxes of tissues for emotional melt- 
downs? Comfortable leather chairs and a private butler? 
What about the secret files they keep on all the kids? 

The truth is nothing more than a small green room with dirty 
windows and a lingering smell of cigarettes, even though it 
has been illegal to smoke on school property for years. Metal 
folding chairs surround a battered table. One wall has a bul- 
letin board that hasn't been cleared off since Americans 
walked on the moon. And I look, but I can't find any secret 
files. They must keep them in the principal's office. 

I'm supposed to make a centerpiece out of waxed maple 
leaves, acorns, ribbon, and a mile of thin wire. Heather is go- 
ing to set the table and hang the banner. She babbles on about 
her classes while I ruin leaf after red leaf. I ask if we can trade 
before I cause permanent damage to myself. Heather gently 
untangles me from the wire. She holds a bunch of leaves in 
one hand, twists the wire around the stem - one-two - hides 
the wire with ribbon and hot-glues the acorns into place. It's 
spooky. I hurry to finish the table. 

Heather: "What do you think?" 

Me: "You are a decorating genius." 

Heather: [eyes rolling] "No, silly. What do you think about 
this! Me! Can you believe they're letting me join? Meg has 
been so sweet to me, she calls me every night just to talk." She 
walks around the table and straightens the forks I just set. 
"You are going to think this is ridiculous, but I was so up- 
set last month I asked my parents to send me to boarding 
school. But now I have friends, and I know how to open my 
locker, and [she pauses and scrunches her face up] it's just 
perfect!" 

I don't have to choke out an answer because Meg 'n' Emily 'n' 
Siobhan march in, carrying trays of mini-muffins and apple 
slices dipped in chocolate. Meg raises an eyebrow at me. 

Me: "Thanks for the homework, Heather. You are so help- 
ful." I scoot out the door, leaving it open a crack to watch 
what happens next. Heather stands at attention while our 
handiwork is inspected. Meg picks up the centerpiece and ex- 
amines it from every angle. 

Meg: "Nicejob." 

Heather blushes. 

Emily: "Who was that girl?" 

Heather: "She's a friend. She was the first person to make me 
feel at home here." 

Siobhan: "She's creepy. What's wrong with her lips? It looks 
like she's got a disease or something." 

Emily holds out her watch (the watchband matches the bow 
in her hair). Five minutes. Heather has to leave before the 
teachers arrive. Part of being on probation means she's not al- 
lowed to take credit for her work. 

I hide in the bathroom until I know Heather's bus has left. 
The salt in my tears feels good when it stings my lips. I wash 
my face in the sink until there is nothing left of it, no eyes, no 
nose, no mouth. A slick nothing. 



NIGHTMARE 

I see FT in the hallway. FT goes to Merryweather. IT is walking 
with Aubrey Cheerleader. IT is my nightmare and I can't wake up. 
IT sees me. IT smiles and winks. Good thing my lips are 
stitched together or I'd throw up. 



MY REPORT CARD: 

SECOND MARKING PERIOD 

Plays Nice B Social Studies C Spanish C Art A 
Lunch D Biology B Algebra C+ 

Clothes C English C Gym C+ 


GO 



(FILL IN THE BLANK)! 



The Ecology Club has won round two. We are no longer the 
Tigers because the name shows "shocking disrespect" for an 
endangered creature. 

I know I'm shocked. 

The Ecology Club made great posters. They laid out head- 
lines from the sports page: TIGERS RIPPED APART! TIGERS 
SLAUGHTERED! TIGERS KILLED! side by side with color 
photos of Bengal tigers with their skins peeled off. Effective. 
The Ecology Club has some good PR people. (The football 
team would have protested, but the sad truth is that they've 
lost every game this season. They are happy not to be called 
the Tigers. Other teams called them Pussycats. Not manly.) 
More than half the school signed a petition and the tree hug- 
gers got letters of support from a bunch of outside groups and 
three Hollywood Actors. 

They herd us into an assembly that is supposed to be a "dem- 
ocratic forum" to come up with a new school mascot. Who 
are we? We can't be the Buccaneers because pirates supported 
violence and discrimination against women. The kid who sug- 
gests the Shoemakers in honor of the old moccasin factory is 
laughed out of the auditorium. Warriors insults Native Amer- 
icans. I think Overbearing Eurocentric Patriarchs would be 
perfect, but I don't suggest it. 

Student Council is holding an election before Winter Break. 
Our choices: 

a. The Bees - useful to agriculture, painful to cross 

b. Icebergs - in honor of our festive winter weather 

c. Hilltoppers - guaranteed to frighten opponents 

d. Wombats - no one knows if they're endangered 



CLOSET SPACE 

My parents commanded me to stay after school every day for 
extra help from teachers. I agreed to stay after school. I hang 
out in my refurbished closet. It is shaping up nicely. 

The first thing to go is the mirror. It is screwed to the wall, so I 
cover it with a poster of Maya Angelou that the librarian gave 
me. She said Ms. Angelou is one of the greatest American writ- 
ers. The poster was coming down because the school board 
banned one of her books. She must be a great writer if the 
school board is afraid of her. Maya Angelou's picture watches 
me while I sweep and mop the floor, while I scrub the shelves, 
while I chase spiders out of the corners. I do a little bit of work 
every day. It's like building a fort. I figure Maya would like it if 
I read in here, so I bring a few books from home. Mostly I 
watch the scary movies playing on the inside of my eyelids. 

It is getting harder to talk. My throat is always sore, my lips 
raw. When I wake up in the morning, my jaws are clenched so 
tight I have a headache. Sometimes my mouth relaxes around 
Heather, if we're alone. Every time I try to talk to my parents 
or a teacher, I sputter or freeze. What is wrong with me? It's 
like I have some kind of spastic laryngitis. 

I know my head isn't screwed on straight. I want to leave, 
transfer, warp myself to another galaxy. I want to confess 
everything, hand over the guilt and mistake and anger to 
someone else. There is a beast in my gut, I can hear it scraping 
away at the inside of my ribs. Even if I dump the memory, it 
will stay with me, staining me. My closet is a good thing, a 
quiet place that helps me hold these thoughts inside my head 
where no one can hear them. 



ALL TOGETHER NOW 

My Spanish teacher breaks the "no English" rule to tell us 
that we had better stop pretending we don't understand the 
homework assignments or we're all going to get detention. 
Then she repeats what she just said in Spanish, though it 
seems as if she tosses in a few extra phrases. I don't know why 
she hasn't figured it out yet. If she just taught us all the swear- 
words the first day, we would have done whatever she wanted 
the rest of the year. 

Detention does not sound appealing. I do my homework - 

choose five verbs and conjugate them. 

To translate: traducir. I traducate. 

To flunk: fracasar. Yo am almost fracasaring. 

To hide: esconder. To escape: escapar. 

To forget: olvidar. 



JOB DAY 



Just in case we forget that "weareheretogetagoodfoundation- 
sowecangotocollegeliveuptoourpotentialgetagoodjoblivehap- 
pilyeverafterandgotoDisneyWorld," we have a Job Day. 

Like all things Hi! School, it starts with a test, a test of my de- 
sires and my dreams. Do I (a) prefer to spend time with a 
large group of people? (b) prefer to spend time with a small 
group of close friends? (c) prefer to spend time with family? 
(d) prefer to spend time alone? 

Am I (a) a helper? (b) a doer? (c) a planner? (d) a dreamer? 

If I were tied to railroad tracks and the 3:15 train to Rochester 
was ready to cut a path across my middle, would I (a) scream 
for help? (b) ask my little mice friends to chew through the 
ropes? (c) remember that my favorite jeans were in the dryer 
and were hopelessly wrinkled? (d) close my eyes and pretend 
nothing was wrong? 

Two hundred questions later, I get my results. I should con- 
sider a career in (a) forestry (b) nrefighting (c) communica- 
tions (d) mortuary science. Heather's results are clearer. She 
should be a nurse. It makes her jump up and down. 

Heather: "This is the best! I know exactly what I'm going to 
do. I'll be a candy striper at the hospital this summer. Why 
don't you do it with me? I'll study real hard in biology and go 
to S.U. and get my R.N. What a great plan!" 

How could she know this? I don't know what I'm doing in the 
next five minutes and she has the next ten years figured out. 
I'll worry about making it out of ninth grade alive. Then I'll 
think about a career path. 



FIRST AMENDMENT 

Mr. Neck storms into class, a bull chasing thirty-three red 
flags. We slide into our seats. I think for sure he's going to ex- 
plode. Which he does, but in an unpredictable, faintly educa- 
tional way. 

IMMIGRATION. He writes it on the board. I'm pretty sure he 
spelled it right. 

Mr. Neck: "My family has been in this country for over two 
hundred years. We built this place, fought in every war from 
the first one to the last one, paid taxes, and voted." 

A cartoon thought bubble forms over the heads of everyone in 

the class. ("WILL THIS BE ON THE TEST?") 

Mr. Neck: "So tell me why my son can't get a j ob. " 

A few hands creep skyward. Mr. Neck ignores them. It is a 
pretend question, one he asked so he could give the answer. I 
relax. This is like when my father complains about his boss. 
The best thing to do is to stay awake and blink sympatheti- 
cally. 

His son wanted to be a firefighter, but didn't get the job. Mr. 
Neck is convinced that this is some kind of reverse discrimina- 
tion. He says we should close our borders so that real Ameri- 
cans can get the jobs they deserve. The job test said that I 
would be a good firefighter. I wonder if I could take a job 
away from Mr. Neck's son. 

I tune out and focus on my doodle, a pine tree. I've been try- 
ing to carve a linoleum block in art class. The problem with 
the block is that there is no way to correct mistakes. Every 
mistake I make is frozen in the picture. So I have to think 
ahead. 

Mr. Neck writes on the board again: "DEBATE: America 
should have closed her borders in 1900." That strikes a nerve. 
Several nerves. I can see kids counting backward on their 
fingers, trying to figure when their grandparents or great- 
grandparents were born, when they came to America, if they 
would have made the Neck Cut. When they figure out 
they would have been stuck in a country that hated them, or a 
place with no schools, or a place with no future, their 
hands shoot up. They beg to differ with Mr. Neck's learned 
opinion. 

I don't know where my family came from. Someplace cold, 
where they eat beans on Thursday and hang their wash on the 
line on Monday. I don't know how long we've been in Amer- 
ica. We've been in this school district since I was in first grade; 
that must count for something. I start an apple tree. 

The arguments jump back and forth across the room. A few 
suck-ups quickly figure out which side Mr. Neck is squatting 
on, so they fight to throw out the "foreigners." Anyone whose 
family immigrated in the last century has a story to tell about 
how hard their relatives have worked, the contributions they 
make to the country, the taxes they pay. A member of the 
Archery Club tries to say that we are all foreigners and we 
should give the country back to the Native Americans, but 
she's buried under disagreement. Mr. Neck enjoys the noise, 
until one kid challenges him directly. 

Brave Kid: "Maybe your son didn't get that job because he's 
not good enough. Or he's lazy. Or the other guy was better 
than him, no matter what his skin color. I think the white peo- 
ple who have been here for two hundred years are the ones 
pulling down the country. They don't know how to work - 
they've had it too easy." 

The pro-immigration forces erupt in applause and hooting. 

Mr. Neck. "You watch your mouth, mister. You are talking 
about my son. I don't want to hear any more from you. That's 
enough debate - get your books out." 

The Neck is back in control. Show time is over. I try to draw 
a branch coming out of a tree trunk for the 315th time. It 
looks so flat, a cheap, cruddy drawing. I have no idea how to 
make it come alive. I am so focused I don't notice at first that 
David Petrakis My Lab Partner has stood up. The class stops 
talking. I put my pencil down. 

Mr. Neck: "Mr. Petrakis, take your seat." 

David Petrakis is never, ever in trouble. He is the kid who 
wins perfect attendance records, who helps the staff chase 
down bugs in the computer files of report cards. I chew a 
hangnail on my pinkie. What is he thinking? Has he flipped, 
finally cracked under the pressure of being smarter than every- 
one? 

David: "If the class is debating, then each student has the right 
to say what's on his mind." 

Mr. Neck: "I decide who talks in here." 

David: "You opened a debate. You can't close it just because it 
is not going your way." 

Mr. Neck: "Watch me. Take your seat, Mr. Petrakis." 

David: "The Constitution does not recognize different classes 
of citizenship based on time spent living in the country. I am a 
citizen, with the same rights as your son, or you. As a citizen, 
and as a student, I am protesting the tone of this lesson as 
racist, intolerant, and xenophobic." 

Mr. Neck: "Sit your butt in that chair, Petrakis, and watch your 
mouth! I try to get a debate going in here and you people turn 
it into a race thing. Sit down or you're going to the principal." 

David stares at Mr. Neck, looks at the flag for a minute, 
then picks up his books and walks out of the room. He says 
a million things without saying a word. I make a note to 
study David Petrakis. I have never heard a more eloquent 
silence. 



GIVING THANKS 

The Pilgrims gave thanks at Thanksgiving because the Native 
Americans saved their sorry butts from starving. I give thanks 
at Thanksgiving because my mother finally goes to work and 
my father orders pizza. 

My normally harried, rushed mother always turns into a 
strung-out retail junkie just before Turkey Day. It's because of 
Black Friday, the day after Thanksgiving, the start of the 
Christmas shopping season. If she doesn't sell a billion shirts 
and twelve million belts on Black Friday, the world will end. 
She lives on cigarettes and black coffee, swearing like a rap 
star and calculating spreadsheets in her head. The goals she 
sets for her store are totally unrealistic and she knows it. She 
can't help herself. It's like watching someone caught in an 
electric fence, twitching and squirming and very stuck. Every 
year, just when she's stressed to the snapping point, she cooks 
Thanksgiving dinner. We beg her not to. We plead with her, 
send anonymous notes. She doesn't listen. 

I go to bed the night before Thanksgiving at 10 p.m. She's 
pounding on her laptop at the dining-room table. When I 
come downstairs Thanksgiving morning, she's still there. I 
don't think she slept. 

She looks up at me in my robe and bunny slippers. "Oh, 
damn," she says. "The turkey." 

I peel potatoes while she gives the frozen turkey a hot bath. 
The windows fog up, separating us from the outside. I want to 
suggest that we have something else for dinner, spaghetti 
maybe, or sandwiches, but I know she wouldn't take it the 
right way. She hacks at the guts of the turkey with an ice pick 
to get out the bag of body parts. I'm impressed. Last year she 
cooked the bird with the bag inside. 

Cooking Thanksgiving dinner means something to her. It's 
like a holy obligation, part of what makes her a wife and 
mother. My family doesn't talk much and we have nothing in 
common, but if my mother cooks a proper Thanksgiving din- 
ner, it says we'll be a family for one more year. Kodak logic. 
Only in film commercials does stuff like that work. 

I finish the potatoes. She sends me to the TV to watch the pa- 
rades. Dad stumbles downstairs. "How is she?" he asks be- 
fore he goes in the kitchen. "It's Thanksgiving," I say. Dad 
puts on his coat. "Doughnuts?" he asks. I nod. 

The phone rings. Mom answers. It's the store. Emergency #1 . 
I go into the kitchen for a soda. She pours me orange juice, 
which I can't drink because it burns my scabby lips. The 
turkey floats in the sink, a ten-pound turkey iceberg. A 
turkeyberg. I feel very much like the Titanic. 

Mom hangs up and chases me out with instructions to take a 
shower and clean my room. I soak in the bathtub. I fill my 
lungs with air and float on top of the water, then blow out all 
my breath and sink to the bottom. I put my head under- 
water to listen to my heart beat. The phone rings again. 
Emergency #2 . 

By the time I'm dressed, the parades are over and Dad is 
watching football. Confectioner's sugar dusts the stubble on 
his face. I don't like it when he bums around the house on hol- 
idays. I like my Dad clean-shaven and wearing a suit. He mo- 
tions for me to get out of the way so he can see the screen. 

Mom is on the phone. Emergency #3. The long curly cord 
snakes around and around her thin body, like a rope tying her 
to the stake. Two drumstick tips poke out of an enormous pot 
of boiling water. She is boiling the frozen turkey. "It's too big 
for the microwave," she explains. "It will be thawed soon." 
She puts a finger in her free ear to concentrate on what the 
phone is telling her. I take a plain doughnut from the bag and 
go back to my room. 

Three magazines later, my parents are arguing. Not a rip- 
roarer. A simmering argument, a few bubbles splashing on the 
stove. I want another doughnut, but don't feel like wading 
through the fight to get it. They retreat to their corners when 
the phone rings again. Here's my chance. 

Mom has the phone to her ear when I walk in the kitchen, but 
she isn't listening to it. She rubs the steam from the window 
and stares into the back yard. I join her at the sink. 

Dad strides across the back yard, wearing an oven mitt and 
carrying the steaming turkey by one leg. "He said it would 
take hours to thaw," mutters Mom. A tiny voice squeaks from 
the receiver. "No, not you, Ted," she tells the phone. Dad lays 
the turkey on the chopping block and picks up his hatchet. 
Whack. The hatchet sticks in the frozen turkey flesh. He saws 
back and forth. Whack. A slice of frozen turkey slides to the 
ground. He picks it up and waves it at the window. Mom 
turns her back to him and tells Ted she's on her way. 

After Mom leaves for the store, Dad takes over the dinner. It's 
the principle of the thing. If he gripes about the way she han- 
dled Thanksgiving, then he has to prove he can do a better 
job. He brings in the butchered dirty meat and washes it in the 
sink with detergent and hot water. He rinses off his hatchet. 

Dad: "Just like the old days, right, Mellie? Fellow goes out 
into the woods and brings home dinner. This isn't so difficult. 
Cooking just requires some organization and the ability to 
read. Now get me the bread. I'm going to make real stuffing, 
the way my mother used to. You don't need to help. Why 
don't you do some homework, maybe some extra-credit work 
to pull those grades up. I'll call you when dinner is ready." 

I think about studying, but it's a holiday, so I park myself on 
the living-room couch and watch an old movie instead. I smell 
smoke twice, wince when glass shatters on the floor, and listen 
in on the other phone to his conversation with the turkey hot- 
line lady. She says turkey soup is the best part of Thanksgiving 
anyway. He calls me into the kitchen an hour later, with the 
fake enthusiasm of a father who has screwed up big-time. 

Bones are heaped on the cutting board. A pot of glue boils on 
the stove. Bits of gray, green, and yellow roll in the burping 
white paste. 

Dad: "It's supposed to be soup." 
Me: 

Dad: "It tasted a bit watery, so I kept adding thickener. I put 
in some corn and peas." 

Me: 

Dad: [pulling wallet from his back pocket] "Call for pizza. I'll 
get rid of this." 

I order double cheese, double mushroom. Dad buries the soup 
in the back yard next to our dead beagle, Ariel. 



WISHBONE 

I want to make a memorial for our turkey. Never has a bird 
been so tortured to provide such a lousy dinner. I dig the 
bones out of the trash and bring them to art class. Mr. Free- 
man is thrilled. He tells me to work on the bird but keep 
thinking tree. 

Mr. Freeman: "You are on fire, Melinda, I can see it in your 
eyes. You are caught up in the meaning, in the subjectivity of 
the effect of commercialism on this holiday. This is wonderful, 
wonderful! Be the bird. You are the bird. Sacrifice yourself to 
abandoned family values and canned yams." 

Whatever. 

At first, I want to glue the bones together in a heap like 
firewood (get it? - tree - firewood), but Mr. Freeman sighs. I 
can do better, he says. I arrange the bones on a black piece 
of paper and try to draw a turkey around it. I don't need 
Mr. Freeman to tell me it stinks. By this point, he has 
thrown himself back into his own painting and has forgotten 
we exist. 

He is working on a huge canvas. It started out bleak - a gut- 
ted building along a gray road on a rainy day. He spent a 
week painting dirty coins on the sidewalk, sweating to get 
them just right. He painted the faces of school board members 
peering out the windows of the building, then he put bars on 
the windows and turned the building into a prison. His canvas 
is better than TV because you never know what is going to 
happen next. 

I crumple the paper and lay out the bones on the table. 
Melinda Sordino - Anthropologist. I have unearthed the re- 
mains of a hideous sacrifice. The bell rings and I look at Mr. 
Freeman with puppy-dog eyes. He says he'll call my Spanish 
teacher with some kind of excuse. I can stay for another class 
period. When Ivy hears this, she begs permission to stay late, 
too. She's trying to conquer her fear of clowns. She's con- 
si nm mg some weird sculpture - a mask behind a clown's 
face. Mr. Freeman says yes to Ivy, too. She waggles her eye- 
brows at me and grins. By the time I figure out that this might 
be a good time to say something friendly to her, she is back at 
work. 

I glue the bones to a block of wood, arranging the skeleton 
like a museum exhibit. I find knives and forks in the odds-'n'- 
ends bin and glue them so it looks like they are attacking the 
bones. 

I take a step back. It isn't quite done. I rummage in the bin 
again and find a half-melted palm tree from a Lego set. It'll 
do. Mr. Freeman hangs on to everything a normal person 
would throw out: Happy Meal toys, lost playing cards, 
grocery-store receipts, keys, dolls, a saltshaker, trains . . . 
how does he know this stuff could be art? 

I pop the head off a Barbie doll and set it inside the turkey's 
body. That feels right. Ivy walks past and looks. She arches 
her left eyebrow and nods. I wave my hand and Mr. Freeman 
comes over to inspect. He almost faints with delight. 

Mr. Freeman: "Excellent, excellent. What does this say to 
you?" 

Darn. I didn't know there would be a quiz. I clear my throat. 
I can't get any words out, it is too dry. I try again, with a little 
cough. 

Mr. Freeman: "Sore throat? Don't worry, it's going around. 
Want me to tell you what I see?" 

I nod in relief. 



"I see a girl caught in the remains of a holiday gone bad, 
with her flesh picked off day after day as the carcass dries 
out. The knife and fork are obviously middle-class sen- 
sibilities. The palm tree is a nice touch. A broken dream, 
perhaps? Plastic honeymoon, deserted island? Oh, if you 
put it in a slice of pumpkin pie, it could be a desserted 
island!" 

I laugh in spite of myself. I'm getting the hang of this. While 
Ivy and Mr. Freeman watch, I reach in and pluck out the Bar- 
bie head. I set it on top of the bony carcass. There is no place 
for the palm tree - I toss that aside. I move the knife and fork 
so they look like legs. I place a piece of tape over Barbie's 
mouth. 

Me: "Do you have any twigs? Little branches? I could use 
them to make the arms." 

Ivy opens her mouth to say something, then closes it again. 
Mr. Freeman studies my homely project. He doesn't say any- 
thing and I'm afraid he's pissed that I took out the palm tree. 
Ivy tries again. "It's scary," she says. "In a weird way. Not 
clown scary, um, how do I say this? Like, you don't want to 
look at it too long. Good job, Mel." 

That's not the reaction I was hoping for, but I guess it was 
positive. She could have turned her nose up, or ignored me, 
but she didn't. Mr. Freeman taps his chin. He looks way too 
serious to be an art teacher. He's making me nervous. 

Mr. Freeman: "This has meaning. Pain." 
The bell rings. I leave before he can say more. 



PEELED AND CORED 

We are studying fruit in biology. Ms. Keen has spent a week 
teaching us the finer points of stamens and pistils, seedpods 
and flowers. The earth has frozen, it snows lightly at night, but 
Ms. Keen is determined to keep Spring alive in her classroom. 

The Back Row sleeps until she points out that apple trees need 
bees to reproduce. "Reproduce" is a trigger word for the Back 
Row. They have figured out it is related to sex. The lecture on 
pistils and stamens turns into a big Ha-ha. Ms. Keen has been 
teaching since the Middle Ages. It would take more than a 
row full of overheated hypothalamuses (hypothalamii?) to dis- 
tract her from the day's lesson. She calmly proceeds to the 
hands-on portion of the lab. 

Apples. We each get a Rome or a Cortland or a Mcintosh and a 
plastic knife. We are instructed to dissect. The Back Row holds 
sword fights. Ms. Keen silently writes their names on the black- 
board, along with their current grade. She takes one point off for 
every minute the sword fight continues. They go from low Bs to 
very low Cs before they figure out what is going on. They howl. 

Back Row: "That's not fair! You can't do that to us! You 
didn't give us a chance." 

She takes off another point. They saw their apples, mutter, 
mutter, curse, curse, old cow, stupid teacher. 

David Petrakis My Lab Partner cuts his apple into eight equal 
wedges. He doesn't say a word. He is in the middle of a Pre- 
Med Week. David can't make up his mind between pre-med 
and pre-law. Ninth grade is a minor inconvenience to him. A 
zit-cream commercial before the Feature Film of Life. 

Applesmell soaks the air. One time when I was little, my par- 
ents took me to an orchard. Daddy set me high in an apple 
tree. It was like falling up into a storybook, yummy and red 
and leaf and the branch not shaking a bit. Bees bumbled 
through the air, so stuffed with apple they couldn't be both- 
ered to sting me. The sun warmed my hair, and a wind pushed 
my mother into my father's arms, and all the apple-picking 
parents and children smiled for a long, long minute. 

That's how biology class smells. 

I bite my apple. White teeth red apple hard juice deep bite. 
David sputters. 

David: "You're not supposed to do that! She'll kill you! You're 
supposed to cut it! Didn't you even listen? You'll lose points!" 

Clearly, David missed the apple-tree-sitting requirement of 
childhood. 

I cut the rest of my apple into four fat pieces. My apple has 
twelve seeds. One of the seeds has split its shell and reaches a 
white hand upward. An apple tree growing from an apple 
seed growing in an apple. I show the little plantseed to Ms. 
Keen. She gives me extra credit. David rolls his eyes. Biology 
is so cool. 



FIRST AMENDMENT, SECOND VERSE 

Rebellion is in the air. We only have a week left before Winter 
Break. Students are getting away with murder and the staff is 
too worn out to care. I hear rumors of eggnog in the faculty 
lounge. This revolutionary spirit is even breaking out in so- 
cial studies class. David Petrakis is fighting back about the 
freedom-to-speak thing. 

I get to class on time. I don't dare use a stolen late pass with 
Mr. Neck. David takes a seat in the front row and sets a tape 
recorder on his desk. As Mr. Neck opens his mouth to speak, 
David presses the Play and Record buttons at the same time, 
like a pianist hitting an opening chord. 

Mr. Neck teaches the class straight. We are galloping toward 
the Revolutionary War. He writes "No Taxation Without 
Representation" on the board. Very cool rhyming slogan. Too 
bad they didn't have bumper stickers back then. The colonists 
wanted a voice in the British Parliament. No one in power 
would listen to their complaints. The lecture is going to 
sound great on the tape. Mr. Neck has prepared notes and 
everything. His voice is as smooth as a new-poured road. No 
bumps. 

The tape will not be able to pick up the angry gleam in Mr. 
Neck's eyes, though. He glares at David the whole time he's 
speaking. If a teacher stared murder at me for forty-eight min- 
utes, I'd turn into a puddle of melted Jell-O. David stares 
back. 

The school office is the best place to go for gossip. I overhear 
the sound bite about the Petrakises' lawyer while I wait for 
another lecture from my guidance counselor about not living 
up to my potential. How does she know what my potential is? 
Potential for what? When she talks blah blah, I usually count 
the dots in her ceiling tiles. 

The guidance counselor is late today, so I sit invisible in the 
red plastic chair while the secretary brings a PTA volunteer up 
to warp speed on the Petrakis thing. David's parents have 
hired a big, nasty, expensive lawyer. He is threatening to sue 
the school district and Mr. Neck for everything from incompe- 
tence to civil rights violations. David's tape recorder is al- 
lowed in class to document "potential future violations." The 
secretary doesn't sound too upset at the idea that Mr. Neck 
could get canned. I bet she knows him personally. 

David must have mentioned the hairy-eyeball treatment to 
his lawyer that afternoon because the next day there is a 
videocamera set up in the back of class. David Petrakis is my 
hero. 



WOMBATS RULE! 



I let Heather talk me into going to the Winter Assembly. She 
hates sitting alone almost as much as I do. The Marthas have 
not issued an imperial invitation for her to sit with them. She's 
bummed, but she tries not to show it. In perfect Martha style, 
she wears a green sweater with a huge Santa face on it, red 
leggings, and fluffy boots. Too, too perfect. I refuse to wear 
anything seasonal. 

Heather gives me my Christmas present early - bell earrings 
that chime when I turn my head. This means I'll have to get 
her something. Maybe I'll go wholesome and buy a friendship 
necklace. She's the friendship-necklace type. The bells are a 
great choice. I shake my head all through Principal Principal's 
speech to drown out his voice. The orchestra plays an unrec- 
ognizable tune. Heather says the school board won't let them 
perform Christmas carols or Hanukkah songs or Kwanza 
tunes. Instead of multicultural, we have no-cultural. 

The high point of the assembly is the announcement of our 
new name and mascot. Principal Principal reads the vote total: 
Bees - 3. Icebergs - 17. Hilltoppers - 1. Wombats - 32. The 
other 1,547 votes were write-ins or illegible. 

The Merryweather Wombats. Has a nice ring. We are the 
Wombats, woozy, wicked Wombats! Worried, withdrawn, 
weepy, weird Wombats. We pass Raven Cheerleader and Am- 
ber Cheerleader on the way to my bus. They wrinkle their 
brows as they struggle to rhyme "wombat." Democracy is a 
wonderful institution. 



WINTER BREAK 

School is out and there are two days until Christmas. Mom 
left a note saying I can put up the tree if I want. I drag the tree 
out of the basement and stand it in the driveway so I can 
sweep the dust and cobwebs off it with a broom. We leave the 
lights on it from year to year. All I have to do is hang the or- 
naments. 

There is something about Christmas that requires a rug rat. 
Little kids make Christmas fun. I wonder if we could rent one 
for the holidays. When I was tiny we would buy a real tree 
and stay up late drinking hot chocolate and finding just the 
right place for the special decorations. It seems like my par- 
ents gave up the magic when I figured out the Santa lie. 
Maybe I shouldn't have told them I knew where the presents 
really came from. It broke their hearts. 

I bet they'd be divorced by now if I hadn't been born. I'm sure 
I was a huge disappointment. I'm not pretty or smart or ath- 
letic. I'm just like them - an ordinary drone dressed in secrets 
and lies. I can't believe we have to keep playacting until I 
graduate. It's a shame we can't just admit that we have failed 
family living, sell the house, split up the money, and get on 
with our lives. 

Merry Christmas. 



I call Heather, but she's shopping. What would Heather do if 
she were here and the house didn't feel like Christmas? I will 
pretend to be Heather. I bundle up in geeky snow clothes, 
wrap a scarf around my head, and plunge into a snowdrift. 
The back yard is gorgeous. The trees and bushes are all 
wrapped in ice, reflecting sunlight into something powerful. I 
just have to make a snow angel. 

I tromp to an unmarked piece of snow and let myself fall 
backward. The scarf falls over my mouth as I wave my wings. 
The wet wool smells like first grade, walking to school on a 
cold morning with my milk money jangling in the tips of my 
mittens. We lived in a different house then, a smaller house. 
Mom worked at the jewelry counter and was home after 
school. Dad had a nicer boss and talked all the time about 
buying a boat. I believed in Santa Claus. 

The wind stirs the branches overhead. My heart clangs like a 
fire bell. The scarf is too tight on my mouth. I pull it off to 
breathe. The moisture on my skin freezes. I want to make a 
wish, but I don't know what to wish for. And I have snow up 
my back. 

I break off branches from the holly bushes and a few sprigs of 
pine and carry them inside. I tie them together with red yarn 
and set them on the fireplace mantel and the dining-room 
table. It doesn't look as nice as when the lady on TV did it, 
but it makes the place smell better. I still wish we could bor- 
row a kid for a few days. 

We sleep in till noon on Christmas. I give Mom a black 
sweater and Dad a CD with sixties hits. They give me a hand- 
ful of gift certificates, a TV for my room, ice skates, and a 
sketch pad with charcoal pencils. They say they have noticed 
me drawing. 

I almost tell them right then and there. Tears flood my 
eyes. They noticed I've been trying to draw. They noticed. I 
try to swallow the snowball in my throat. This isn't going 
to be easy. I'm sure they suspect I was at the party. Maybe 
they even heard about me calling the cops. But I want to 
tell them everything as we sit there by our plastic Christ- 
mas tree while the Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer video 
plays. 

I wipe my eyes. They wait with unsure smiles. The snow- 
ball grows larger. When I snuck home that night, they 
weren't in the house. Both cars were gone. I was supposed to 
have been at Rachel's all night long - they weren't expect- 
ing me, that's for sure. I showered until the hot water was 
gone, then I crawled in bed and did not sleep. Mom pulled 
in around 2 a.m., Dad just before sunup. They had not 
been together. What had they been doing? I thought I 
knew. How can I talk to them about that night? How can I 
start? 

Rudolph sets out on his ice floe. "I'm independent," he de- 
clares. Dad looks at his watch. Mom stuffs the wrapping pa- 
per into a garbage bag. They leave the room. I am still sitting 
on the floor, holding the paper and charcoals. I didn't even say 
"Thank you." 


HARD LABOR 



I had two days of freedom before my parents decided I wasn't 
going to "lounge around the house all vacation." I have to go 
to work with them. I'm not legally old enough to work, but 
they don't care. I spend the weekend at Mom's store, dealing 
with all the merchandise brought back by grumpy people. Did 
anyone in Syracuse get what they wanted for Christmas? Sure 
doesn't seem like it. Since I'm underage, Mom sticks me in the 
basement stockroom. I'm supposed to refold the shirts, stick- 
ing them with eleven pins. The other employees watch me like 
I'm a rat, like my mother has sent me to the basement to spy 
on them. I fold a few shirts, then kick back and take out a 
book. They relax. I am one of them. I don't want to be there 
either. 

Mom obviously knows I did squat, but she doesn't say 
anything in the car. We don't leave until way after dark be- 
cause she has so much work to do. Sales have sucked - she 
didn't get anywhere near the goal she set. Layoffs are com- 
ing. We stop at a traffic light. Mom closes her eyes. Her skin 
is a flat gray color, like underwear washed so many times 
it's about to fall apart. I feel bad that I didn't fold more shirts 
for her. 

The next day they send me to Dad's. He sells some kind of in- 
surance, but I don't know how or why. He sets up a card table 
for me in his office. My job is to put calendars into envelopes, 
seal them up, and stick on mailing labels. He sits at his desk 
and talks to buddies on the phone. 

He gets to work with his feet up. He gets to laugh with his 
friends on the phone. He gets to call out for lunch. I think he 
deserves to be in the basement folding shirts and helping my 
mother. I deserve to be watching cable, or taking a nap, or 
even going to Heather's house. By lunchtime, my stomach 
boils with anger. Dad's secretary says something nice to me 
when she drops off my lunch, but I don't answer her. I glare 
daggers at the back of my father's head. Angry angry angry. I 
have another million envelopes to close. I run my tongue over 
the gross gummy envelope flap. The sharp edge of the flap 
cuts my tongue. I taste my blood. IT's face suddenly pops up 
in my mind. All the anger whistles out of me like I'm a 
popped balloon. Dad is really pissed when he sees how many 
calendars I bled on. He mentions a need for professional help. 

I am actually grateful to go back to school. 



FOUL 

Now that there are two feet of snow on the ground, the 
fizz-ed teachers let us have class inside. They keep the gym at 
about forty degrees because "a little cool air never hurt any- 
one." Easy for them to say, they wear sweatpants. 

The first inside sport is basketball. Ms. Connors teaches us 
how to throw foul shots. I step up to the line, bounce the ball 
twice, and put it through the net. Ms. Connors tells me to do 
it again. And again. She keeps bouncing balls my way, and I 
keep putting them up - swish, swish, swish. Forty-two shots 
later, my arms wobble and I miss one. By that time, the entire 
class has gathered around and is watching. Nicole is just 
about bursting. "You have to join the team!" she shouts. 

Ms. Connors: "Meet me back here during activity period. You 
are Going Places with That Arm." 

Me: 

It is a sad and downtrodden Ms. Connors who meets me three 
hours later. She holds my current grades by two fingers: D, C, 
B-, D, C-, C, A. No basketball team for me, because the 
A was in art, so my GPA is a whopping 1.7. Ms. Connors did 
not win a lacrosse scholarship by being demure or hesitant. 
She times me in wind sprints, then puts me back on the line to 
shoot. 

Ms. Connors: "Try an outside shot bank it off the board have 
you thought about a tutor nice shot it's those Ds that are 
killing you try a lay-up that needs work I could maybe do 
something about the social studies grade but your English 
teacher is impossible she hates sports do you have a hook 
shot?" 

I just do what I'm told. If I felt like talking, I would explain 
that she couldn't pay me enough to play on her basketball 
team. All that running? Sweating? Getting knocked around by 
genetic mutants? I don't think so. Now, if basketball had a 
designated foul-shot shooter, maybe I'd consider. The other 
team fouls you, you get to pay them back. Boom. But that's 
not the way it works, in basketball or in life. 

Ms. Connors looks so eager. I like the sensation of succeeding 
brilliantly at something - even if it is just thunking in foul 
shots one after another. I'll let her dream a few more minutes. 
The boys' varsity team dribbles in. Their record is zero and 
five. Go Wombats! 

Basketball Pole, aka Brendan Keller, the one who contributed 
to my mashed-potato-and-gravy humiliation on the first 
day of school, stands under the basket. The other guys run 
drills and pass in to him. Brendan reaches up a skinny octopus 
tentacle and casually drops the ball through the hoop. Our 
boys are unbeatable as long as they are the only team on the 
floor. 

The boys' coach barks something I don't understand and the 
team lines up behind Basketball Pole for free-throw practice. 
He dribbles, bounce, two, three. He shoots. Brick. Bounce, 
two, three . . . Brick. Brick. Brick. Can't sink a shot from the 
line to save his skinny neck. 

Ms. Connors talks to the boys' coach while I watch the rest of 
the team hit a sorry thirty percent. Then she blows her whistle 
and waves me over. The boys clear out of the way and I take 
my place on the line. "Show 'em," commands Ms. Connors. 
Trained seal me, bounce, bounce, up, swish; again, and again, 
and again, until the guys stop bouncing and everyone is 
watching. Ms. Connors and Basketball Coach talk serious 
frown talk arms on hips, biceps flexing. The boys stare at 
me - visitor from the Planet Foul Shot. Who is this girl? 

Ms. Connors punches Coach in the arm. Coach punches 
Ms. Connors in the arm. They offer me a deal. If I volunteer 
to teach the Basketball Pole how to swish a foul shot, I will 
get an automatic A in gym. I shrug my shoulders and they 
grin. I couldn't say no. I couldn't say anything. I just won't 
show up. 



COLORING OUTSIDE THE LINES 

Our art room is blooming like a museum full of O'Keeffes, 
van Goghs, and that French guy who painted flowers with 
tiny dots. Mr. Freeman is the Vogue Teacher of the Moment. 
There are rumors that he'll be the Teacher of the Year in the 
yearbook. 

His room is Cool Central. He keeps the radio on. We are al- 
lowed to eat as long as we work. He bounced a couple of 
slackers who confused freedom with no rules, so the rest of us 
don't make waves. It is too much fun to give up. The room is 
full of painters, sculptors, and sketchers during activity pe- 
riod, and some kids stay there until the late late buses are 
ready to roll. 

Mr. Freeman's painting is coming along great. Some newspa- 
per guy heard about it and wrote an article. The article 
claimed Mr. Freeman is a gifted genius who has devoted his 
life to education. A color picture of the work-in-progress ac- 
companied the article. Someone said a few school board mem- 
bers recognized themselves. I bet they sue him. 

I wish Mr. Freeman would put a tree in his masterpiece. I 
can't figure out how to make mine look real. I have already 
ruined six linoleum blocks. I can see it in my head: a strong 
old oak tree with a wide scarred trunk and thousands of 
leaves reaching to the sun. There's a tree in front of my 
house just like it. I can feel the wind blow and hear the mock- 
ingbird whistling on the way back to her nest. But when I try 
to carve it, it looks like a dead tree, toothpicks, a child's 
drawing. I can't bring it to life. I'd love to give it up. Quit. 
But I can't think of anything else to do, so I keep chipping 
away at it. 

Principal Principal stormed in yesterday, smelling pleasure. 
His mustache moved up and down, a radar sweep for all 
things unruly. An unseen hand turned off the radio as he 
crossed the threshold, and bags of potato chips vanished, leav- 
ing the faint scent of salt to mix with vermilion oil paint and 
wet clay. 

He scanned the room for merriment. Found only bowed 
heads, graceful pencils, dipping brushes. Mr. Freeman touched 
up the dark roots on the head of a lady school board member 
and asked if Principal Principal needed help. Principal Princi- 
pal stalked out of the room in the direction of the Human 
Waste's smoking haven. 

Maybe I'll be an artist if I grow up. 


POSTER CHILD 



Heather left a note in my locker, begging me to go to her 
house after school. She's in trouble. She is not meeting Martha 
standards. She sobs out the story in her room. I listen and pick 
lint balls off my sweater. 

The Marthas held a craft meeting to make Valentine's pillows 
for little kids who are in the hospital. Meg 'n' Emily sewed 
three sides of the pillows, while the others stuffed, stitched, 
and glued on hearts and teddy bears. Heather was in charge of 
hearts. She was all flustered because a few Marthas didn't like 
her outfit. They yelled at her for gluing hearts crooked. Then 
the top of her glue bottle came off and completely ruined a 
pillow. 

At this point in the story, she throws a doll across her room. I 
move the nail polish out of her reach. 

Meg demoted Heather to pillow stuffing. Once the pillow pro- 
duction line was again rolling smoothly, the meeting began. 
Topic: the Canned Food Drive. The Senior Marthas are in 
charge of delivering the food to the needy (with a newspaper 
photographer present) and meeting with the principal to coor- 
dinate whatever needs coordinating. 

I zone out. She talks about who's in charge of classroom cap- 
tains and who's in charge of publicity and I don't know what 
all. 1 don't come back to earth until Heather says, "I knew 
you wouldn't mind, Mel." 

Me: "What?" 

Heather: "I knew you wouldn't mind helping. I think Emily 
did it on purpose. She doesn't like me. I was going to ask you 
to help, then say I did it by myself, but that would have been 
lying, and besides they would have stuck me with all the 
poster work for the rest of the year. So I said 1 have a friend 
who is really artistic and community-oriented and could she 
help with the posters?" 

Me: "Who?" 

Heather: [laughing now, but I still hold on to the nail polish] 
"You, silly. You draw better than me and you have plenty of 
time. Please say you'll do it! Maybe they'll ask you to join too, 
once they see how talented you are! Please, please, whipped 
cream, chopped nuts and cherry on top please! If I screw this 
up, I know they'll blacklist me and then I'll never be part of 
any of the good groups." 

How could I say no? 



DEAD FROGS 

Our biology class has graduated from fruit to frogs. We were 
scheduled to do the frog unit in April, but the frog company 
delivered our victims on January 14. Pickled frogs have a way 
of disappearing from the storage closet, so today Ms. Keen 
armed us with knives and told us not to gag. 

David Petrakis My Lab Partner is thrilled - anatomy at last. 
There are lists to memorize. The hopping bone's connected to 
the jumping bone, the ribbet bone's connected to the fly- 
catching bone. He seriously talks about wearing one of those 
doctor masks over his face while we "operate." He thinks it 
would be good practice. 

The room does not smell like apple. It smells like frog juice, a 
cross between a nursing home and potato salad. The Back 
Row pays attention. Cutting dead frogs is cool. 

Our frog lies on her back. Waiting for a prince to come and 
princessify her with a smooch? I stand over her with my knife. 
Ms. Keen's voice fades to a mosquito whine. My throat closes 
off. It is hard to breathe. I put out my hand to steady myself 
against the table. David pins her froggy hands to the dissec- 
tion tray. He spreads her froggy legs and pins her froggy feet. 
I have to slice open her belly. She doesn't say a word. She is al- 
ready dead. A scream starts in my gut - I can feel the cut, 
smell the dirt, leaves in my hair. 

I don't remember passing out. David says I hit my head on the 
edge of the table on my way down. The nurse calls my mom 
because I need stitches. The doctor stares into the back of my 
eyes with a bright light. Can she read the thoughts hidden 
there? If she can, what will she do? Call the cops? Send me to 
the nuthouse? Do I want her to? I just want to sleep. The 
whole point of not talking about it, of silencing the memory, 
is to make it go away. It won't. I'll need brain surgery to cut it 
out of my head. Maybe I should wait until David Petrakis is a 
doctor, let him do it. 



MODEL CITIZEN 

Heather has landed a modeling job at a department store in 
the mall. She says she was buying socks with her mother the 
week after her braces came off and some lady asked if she 
modeled. I suspect the fact that her dad works for the mall 
management company had something to do with it. 

The modeling gig is paying off in major Martha points. They 
all want to be Heather's New Best Friend. But she asks me to 
go with her for the bathing suit shoot. I think she's afraid to 
screw up in front of them. Heather's mother drives us. She 
asks if I want to be a model. Heather says I am too shy. I look 
at her mother's eyes watching me in the rearview mirror and 
hide my mouth with my fingers. The scabs on my lips are es- 
pecially gross in that little rectangle mirror. 

Of course I want to be a model. I want to paint my eyelids 
gold. I saw that on a magazine cover and it looked amazing - 
turned the model into a sexy alien that everyone would look 
at but nobody dared touch. 

I like cheeseburgers too much to be a model. Heather has 
stopped eating and complains about fluid retention. She 
should worry more about brain retention, the way she's diet- 
ing away her gray matter. At last check, she was wearing a 
size one and a half, and she just has to get down to a size one. 

The photo shoot is in a building cold enough to store ice. 
Heather looks like our Thanksgiving turkey wearing a blue 
bikini. Her goose bumps are bigger than her boobs. I'm shiver- 
ing, and I'm wearing my ski jacket and a wool sweater. The 
photographer turns up the radio and starts bossing the girls 
around. Heather totally gets into it. She throws her head back, 
stares at the camera, flashes her teeth. The photographer keeps 
saying, "Sexy, sexy, very cute. Look this way. Sexy, think 
beach, think boys." It creeps me out. Heather sneezes in the 
middle of a group pose and her mother runs in with tissues. It 
must be catching. My throat is killing me. I want a nap. 

I don't buy the gold eyeshadow, but I do pick up a bottle of 
Black Death nail polish. It's gloomy, with squiggly lines of red 
in it. My nails are bitten to the bleeding point, so it will look 
natural. I need to get a shirt that matches. Something in a tu- 
bercular gray. 



DEATH BY ALGEBRA 

Mr. Stetman won't give up. He is determined to prove once 
and for all that algebra is something we will use the rest of 
our lives. If he succeeds, I think they should give him the 
Teacher of the Century Award and a two-week vacation in 
Hawaii, all expenses paid. 

He comes to class each day with a new Real-Life Application. 
It is sweet that he cares enough about algebra and his students 
to want to bring them together. He's like a grandfather who 
wants to fix up two young kids that he just knows would 
make a great couple. Only the kids have nothing in common 
and they hate each other. 

Today's Application has something to do with buying guppies 
at the pet store, and calculating how many guppies you could 
breed if you wanted to go into the guppie business. Once the 
guppies turn into x's and y's, my contacts fog. Class ends in a 
debate between the animal-rights activists, who say it is im- 
moral to own fish, and the red-blooded capitalists, who know 
lots of better ways to make money than investing in fish that 
eat their young. I watch the snow falling outside. 



WORD WORK 

Hairwoman is torturing us with essays. Do English teachers 
spend their vacations dreaming up these things? 

The first essay this semester was a dud: "Why America Is 
Great" in five hundred words. She gave us three weeks. Only 
Tiffany Wilson turned it in on time. But the assignment was 
not a complete failure - Hairwoman runs the drama club and 
she recruited several new members based on their perfor- 
mances as to why they needed an extension. 

She has a warped sense of humor as well as a demented beau- 
tician. The next essay was supposed to be fictional: "The Best 
Lost Homework Excuse Ever" in five hundred words. We had 
one night. No one was late. 

But now Hairwoman is on a roll. "How I Would Change 
High School," "Lower the Driving Age to 14," "The Perfect 
Job." Her topics are fun, but she keeps cranking them out, 
one after the next. First she broke our spirits by overwhelming 
us with work we couldn't really complain about because the 
topics are the kind of things we talk about all the time. Re- 
cently she's started sneaking grammar (shudder) into the class- 
room. One day we worked on verb tenses: "I surf the Net, I 
surfed the Net, I was surfing the Net." Then, lively adjectives. 
Does it sound better to say "Nicole's old lacrosse stick hit me 
on the head" or "Nicole's barf-yellow, gnarled, bloodstained 
lacrosse stick hit me on the head"? She even tried to teach us 
the difference between active voice - "I snarfed the Oreos" - 
and passive voice - "The Oreos got snarfed." 

Words are hard work. I hope they send Hairwoman to a con- 
ference or something. I'm ready to help pay for a sub. 



NAMING THE MONSTER 

I work on Heather's posters for two weeks. I try to draw them 
in the art room, but too many people watch me. It is quiet in 
my closet, and the markers smell good. I could stay here for- 
ever, BRING A CAN, SAVE A LIFE. Heather told me to be direct. It 
is the only way to get what we want. I draw posters of bas- 
ketball players shooting cans through a hoop. They demon- 
strate very good form. 

Heather has another modeling job. Tennis clothes, I think. She 
asks me to hang the posters for her. I actually don't mind. It's 
nice having kids see me do something good. Might help my 
reputation. I'm hanging a poster outside the metal-shop room 
when IT creeps up. Little flecks of metal slice through my 
veins. IT whispers to me. 

"Freshmeat." That's what IT whispers. 

IT found me again. I thought I could ignore IT. There are four 
hundred other freshmen in here, two hundred female. Plus all 
the other grades. But he whispers to me. 

I can smell him over the noise of the metal shop and I drop my 
poster and the masking tape and I want to throw up and I can 
smell him and I run and he remembers and he knows. He 
whispers in my ear. 

I lie to Heather about the masking tape and say I put it back 
in the supply box. 



RENT ROUND 3 

My guidance counselor calls Mom at the store to pave the 
way for my report card. Must remember to send her a thank- 
you note. By the time we eat dinner, the Battle is roaring at 
full pitch. Grades, blah, blah, blah, Attitude, blah, blah, blah, 
Help around the house, blah, blah, blah, Not a kid anymore, 
blah, blah, blah. 

I watch the Eruptions. Mount Dad, long dormant, now con- 
sidered armed and dangerous. Mount Saint Mom, oozing 
lava, spitting flame. Warn the villagers to run into the sea. Be- 
hind my eyes I conjugate irregular Spanish verbs. 

A minor blizzard blows outside. The weather lady says it's a 
lake-effect storm - the wind from Canada sucks up water 
from Lake Ontario, runs it through the freeze machine, and 
dumps it on Syracuse. I can feel the wind fighting to break 
through our storm windows. I want the snow to bury our 
house. 

They keep asking questions like "What is wrong with you?" 
and "Do you think this is cute?" How can I answer? I don't 
have to. They don't want to hear anything I have to say. They 
ground me until the Second Coming. I have to come straight 
home after school unless Mom arranges for me to meet with a 
teacher. I can't go to Heather's. They are going to disconnect 
the cable. (Don't think they'll follow through on that one.) 

I do my homework and show it to them like a good little girl. 
When they send me to bed, I write a runaway note and leave 
it on my desk. Mom finds me sleeping in my bedroom closet. 
She hands me a pillow and closes the door again. No more 
blah-blahs. 

I open up a paper clip and scratch it across the inside of my 
left wrist. Pitiful. If a suicide attempt is a cry for help, then 
what is this? A whimper, a peep? I draw little windowcracks 
of blood, etching line after line until it stops hurting. It looks 
like I arm-wrestled a rosebush. 

Mom sees the wrist at breakfast. 

Mom: "I don't have time for this, Melinda." 

Me: 

She says suicide is for cowards. This is an uglynasty Momside. 
She bought a book about it. Tough love. Sour sugar. Barbed 
velvet. Silent talk. She leaves the book on the back of the 
toilet to educate me. She has figured out that I don't say too 
much. It bugs her. 



CAN IT 

Lunch with Heather starts cold. Since winter break, she has 
been sitting at the fringe of the Martha table and I eat on the 
other side of her. I can tell something is up as soon as I walk 
in. All the Marthas are wearing matching outfits: navy cor- 
duroy miniskirts, striped tops, and clear plastic purses. They 
must have gone shopping together. Heather doesn't match. 
They hadn't invited her. 

She is too cool to be nervous about this. I am nervous for her. 
I take an enormous bite of my PBJ and try not to choke. They 
wait until she has a mouthful of cottage cheese. Siobhan puts 
a can of beets on the table. 

Siobhan: "What's this?" 

Heather: [swallowing] "It's a can of beets." 



Siobhan: "No duh. But we found an entire bag of beets in the 
collection closet. They must have come from you." 

Heather: "A neighbor gave them to me. They're beets. People 
eat them. What's the problem?" 

The rest of the Marthas sigh on cue. Apparently, beets are Not 
Good Enough. Real Marthas only collect food that they like 
to eat, like cranberry sauce, dolphin-safe tuna, or baby peas. I 
can see Heather dig her nails into her palms under the table. 
The peanut butter molds to the roof of my mouth like a re- 
tainer. 

Siobhan: "That's not all. Your numbers are abysmal." 
Heather: "What numbers?" 

Siobhan: "Your can quota. You aren't carrying your weight. 
You aren't contributing." 

Heather: "We've only been doing this for a week. I know I'll 
get more." 

Emily: "It's not just the can quota. Your posters are ridicu- 
lous - my little brother could have done a better job. It's no 
wonder no one wants to help us. You've turned this project 
into a joke. " 

Emily slides her tray across to Heather. Heather gets up 
without a word and clears it away. Traitor. She isn't going 
to stick up for my posters. The peanut butter in my mouth 
hardens. 

Siobhan pokes Emily and looks at the door. 

Siobhan: "It's him. Andy Evans just walked in. I think he's 
looking for you, Em." 

I turn around. They are talking about IT. Andy. Andy Evans. 
Short stabby name. Andy Evans, who strolls in carrying a 
take-out bag from Taco Bell. He offers the cafeteria monitor a 
burrito. Emily and Siobhan giggle. Heather returns, her smile 
back in place, and asks if Andy is as bad as everyone says. 
Emily blushes the color of canned beets. 

Siobhan: "It's just a rumor." 

Emily: "Fact - he's gorgeous. Fact - he's rich. Fact - he's just 
the itsiest bit dangerous and he called me last night." 

Siobhan: "Rumor - he sleeps with anything." 

The peanut butter locks my jaws closed. 

Emily: "I don't believe it. Rumors are spread by jealous peo- 
ple. Hi, Andy. Did you bring enough lunch for everyone?" 

It feels like the Prince of Darkness has swept his cloak over 
the table. The lights dim. I shiver. Andy stands behind me to 
flirt with Emily. I lean into the table to stay as far away from 
him as I can. The table saws me in half. Emily's mouth moves, 
the fluorescent lights glittering on her teeth. The other girls 
scootch toward Emily to soak up her Attractiveness Rays. 
Andy must be talking too, I can feel deep vibrations in my 
backbone, like a thudding speaker. I can't hear the words. 

He twirls my ponytail in his fingers. Emily's eyes narrow. I 
mumble something idiotic and run for the bathroom. I heave 
lunch into the toilet, then wash my face with the ice water 
that comes out of the Hot faucet. Heather does not come 
looking for me. 



DARK ART 

The cement-slab sky hangs inches above our heads. Which direc- 
tion is east? It has been so long since I've seen the sun, I can't re- 
member. Turtlenecks creep out of bottom drawers. Turtle faces 
pull back into winter clothes. We won't see some kids until spring. 

Mr. Freeman is in trouble. Big-time. He gave up paperwork 
when the school board Xed out his supply budget. They have 
caught up with him. Teachers just handed in the second- 
marking-period grades and Mr. Freeman gave out 210 As. 
Someone smelled a rat. Probably the office secretary. 

I wonder if they called him down to Principal Principal's office 
and put this on his Permanent Record. He has stopped work- 
ing on his canvas, the painting we all thought was going to be 
this awesome, earth-shattering piece of art that would be auc- 
tioned for a million dollars. The art room is cold, Mr. Free- 
man's face a shade of gray-purple. If he wasn't so depressed, 
I'd ask him what the name of that color is. He just sits on his 
stool, a blue broken cricket husk. 

No one talks to him. We blow on our fingers to warm them 
up and sculpt or draw or paint or sketch, or, in my case, 
carve. I start a new linoleum block. My last tree looked like it 
had died from some fungal infection - not the effect I wanted 
at all. The cold makes the linoleum stiffer than usual. I dig the 
chisel into the block and push, trying to follow the line of a 
tree trunk. 

I follow the line of my thumb instead and gash myself. I swear 
and stick my thumb in my mouth. Everybody looks at me, so 
I take it out again. Mr. Freeman hurries over with a box of 
Kleenex. It isn't a deep cut, and I shake my head when he asks 
if I want to go to the nurse's office. He washes my chisel off in 
the sink and puts bleach on it. Some sort of AIDS regulation. 
When it is germ-free and dry, he carries it back toward my 
table, but stops in front of his canvas. He hasn't finished 
painting. The bottom right corner is empty. The prisoners' 
faces are menacing - you can't take your eyes off them. I 
wouldn't want a painting like that hanging over my couch. It 
looks like it might come alive at night. 

Mr. Freeman steps back, as if he has just seen something new 
in his own picture. He slices the canvas with my chisel, ruin- 
ing it with a long, ripping sound that makes the entire class 
gasp. 



MY REPORT CARD 

Attitude D Social Studies D Spanish C- Art A 
Lunch C Biology B Algebra C- 

Clothes C- English C- Gym C- 


THIRD MARKING PERIOD 



DEATH OF THE WOMBAT 



The Wombat is dead. No assembly, no vote. Principal Princi- 
pal made an announcement this morning. He said hornets bet- 
ter represent the Merryweather spirit than foreign marsupials, 
plus the Wombat mascot costume was going to suck money 
from the prom committee's budget. We are the Hornets and 
that is final. 

The seniors support this decision totally. They wouldn't be 
able to hold up their heads if the prom had to be moved from 
the Holiday Inn Ballroom to the gym. That would be so 
elementary-school. 

Our cheerleaders are working on annoying chants that end in 
lots of buzzing. I think this is a mistake. I have visions of op- 
posing teams making enormous flyswatters and giant cans of 
insecticide out of papier-mache to humiliate us during half- 
time programs. 

I'm allergic to hornets. One sting and my skin bubbles with 
hives and my throat closes up. 



COLD WEATHER AND BUSES 

I miss the bus because I couldn't believe how dark it was when 
my alarm clock went off. I need a clock that will turn on a 
300-watt bulb when it's time to get up. Either that or a 
rooster. 

When I realize how late it is, I decide not to rush. Why 
bother? Mom comes downstairs and I'm reading the funnies 
and eating oatmeal. 

Mom: "You missed the bus again." 

I nod. 

Mom: "You expect me to drive you again." 
Another nod. 

Mom: "You'll need boots. It's a long walk and it snowed 
again last night. I'm already late." 

That is unexpected, but not harsh. The walk isn't that bad - 
it's not like she made me hike ten miles through a snowstorm 
uphill in both directions or anything. The streets are quiet and 
pretty. The snow covers yesterday's slush and settles on the 
rooftops like powdered sugar on a gingerbread town. 

By the time I get to Fayette's, the town bakery, I'm hungry 
again. Fayette's makes wicked good jelly doughnuts and I 
have lunch money in my pocket. I decide to buy two dough- 
nuts and call it brunch. 

I cross the parking lot and IT comes out the door. Andy Evans 
with a raspberry-dripping jelly doughnut in one hand and a 
cup of coffee in the other. I stop on a frozen puddle. Maybe he 
won't notice me if I stand still. That's how rabbits survive; 
they freeze in the presence of predators. 

He sets the coffee on top of his car and fumbles in his pocket 
for the keys. Very, very adult, this coffee/car-keys/cut-school 
guy. He drops the keys and swears. He isn't going to notice 
me. I'm not here - he can't see me standing here in my purple 
marshmallow jacket. 

But of course my luck with this guy sucks. So he turns his 
head and sees me. And wolfsmiles, showing oh granny what 
big teeth you have. 

He steps toward me, holding out the doughnut. "Want a 
bite?" he asks. 

BunnyRabbit bolts, leaving fast tracks in the snow. Getaway 
getaway getaway. Why didn't I run like this before when I was 
a one-piece talking girl? 

Running makes me feel like I am eleven years old and fast. I burn 
a strip up the sidewalk, melting snow and ice three feet on either 
side. When I stop, a brand-new thought explodes in my head: 

Why go to school? 



ESCAPE 

The first hour of blowing off school is great. No one to tell me 
what to do, what to read, what to say. It's like living in an 
MTV video - not with the stupid costumes, but wearing that 
butt-strutting, I-do-what-I-want additood. 

I wander down Main Street. Beauty parlor, 7-Eleven, bank, 
card store. The rotating bank sign says it is 22 degrees. I wan- 
der up the other side. Appliance store, hardware store, park- 
ing lot, grocery store. My insides are cold from breathing in 
frozen air. I can feel the hairs in my nose crackle. My strut 
slows to a foot-dragging schlump. I even think about trudging 
uphill to school. At least it's heated. 

I bet kids in Arizona enjoy playing hooky more than kids 
trapped in Central New York. No slush. No yellow snow. 

I'm saved by a Centro bus. It coughs and rumbles and spits 
out two old women in front of the grocery store. I climb on. 
Destination: The Mall. 

You never think about the mall being closed. It's always sup- 
posed to be there, like milk in the refrigerator or God. But it is 
just opening when I get off the bus. Store managers juggle key 
rings and extra-large coffees, then the cage gates fly up in the 
air. Lights wink on, the fountains jump, music plays behind 
the giant ferns, and the mall is open. 

White-haired grandmas and grandpops powerwalk squeak- 
squeak, going so fast they don't even look at the window dis- 
plays. I hunt spring fashions - nothing that fit last year fits 
now. How can I shop with Mom if I don't want to talk to her? 
She might love it - no arguing that way. But then I'd have to 
wear the clothes she picked out. Conundrum - a three-point 
vocab word. 

I sit by the central elevator, where they set up Santa's Work- 
shop after Halloween. The air smells like french fries and 
floor cleaner. The sun through the skylight is summer hot and 
I shed layers - jacket, hat, mittens, sweater. I lose seven 
pounds in half a minute, feel like I could float up alongside the 
elevator. Tiny brown birds sing above me. No one knows how 
they got in, but they live in the mall and sing pretty. I lie on 
the bench and watch the birds weave through the warm air 
until the sun burns so bright I'm afraid it will make holes in 
my eyeballs. 

I should probably tell someone, just tell someone. Get it over 
with. Let it out, blurt it out. 

I want to be in fifth grade again. Now, that is a deep dark se- 
cret, almost as big as the other one. Fifth grade was easy - old 
enough to play outside without Mom, too young to go off the 
block. The perfect leash length. 

A rent-a-cop strolls by. He studies the wax women in 
the Sears window, then strolls back the other way. He 
doesn't even bother with a fake smile, or an "Are you lost?" 
I'm not in fifth grade. He starts back for a third pass, his fin- 
ger on his radio. Will he turn me in? Time to find that bus 
stop. 

I spend the rest of the day waiting for it to be 2:48, so it's not 
all that different from school. I figure I learned a good lesson, 
and set my alarm clock early for the next day. I wake up on 
time for four days in a row, get on the bus four days in a row, 
ride home after school. I want to scream. I think I'll need to 
take a day off every once in a while. 


CODE BREAKING 



Hairwoman has been buying new earrings. One pair hangs all 
the way down to her shoulders. Another has bells in them like 
the pair Heather gave me at Christmas. I guess I can't wear 
mine anymore. There should be a law. 

It's Nathaniel Hawthorne Month in English. Poor Nathaniel. 
Does he know what they've done to him? We are reading The 
Scarlet Letter one sentence at a time, tearing it up and chew- 
ing on its bones. 

It's all about SYMBOLISM, says Hairwoman. Every word 
chosen by Nathaniel, every comma, every paragraph break - 
these were all done on purpose. To get a decent grade in her 
class, we have to figure out what he was really trying to say. 
Why couldn't he just say what he meant? Would they pin scar- 
let letters on his chest? B for blunt, S for straightforward? 

I can't whine too much. Some of it is fun. It's like a code, 
breaking into his head and finding the key to his secrets. Like 
the whole guilt thing. Of course you know the minister feels 
guilty and Hester feels guilty, but Nathaniel wants us to know 
this is a big deal. If he kept repeating, "She felt guilty, she felt 
guilty, she felt guilty," it would be a boring book and no one 
would buy it. So he planted SYMBOLS, like the weather, and 
the whole light and dark thing, to show us how poor Hester 
feels. 

I wonder if Hester tried to say no. She's kind of quiet. We 
would get along. I can see us, living in the woods, her wearing 
that A, me with an S maybe, S for silent, for stupid, for 
scared. S for silly. For shame. 

So the code-breaking part was fun for the first lesson, but a 
little of it goes a long way. Hairwoman is hammering it to 
death. 

Hairwoman: "The description of the house with bits of glass 
embedded in the walls - what does it mean?" 

Utter silence from the class. A fly left over from fall buzzes 
against the cold window. A locker slams in the hall. Hair- 
woman answers her own question. 

"Think of what that would look like, a wall with glass em- 
bedded in it. It would . . . reflect? Sparkle? Shine on sunny 
days maybe. Come on, people, I shouldn't have to do this by 
myself. Glass in the wall. We use that on top of prison walls 
nowadays. Hawthorne is showing us that the house is a 
prison, or a dangerous place maybe. It is hurtful. Now, I 
asked you to find some examples of the use of color. Who can 
list a few pages where color is described?" 

The fly buzzes a farewell buzz and dies. 

Rachel/Rachelle, my ex-best friend: "Who cares what the 
color means? How do you know what he meant to say? I 
mean, did he leave another book called 'Symbolism in My 
Books'? If he didn't, then you could just be making all of this 
up. Does anyone really think this guy sat down and stuck all 
kinds of hidden meanings into his story? It's just a story." 

Hairwoman: "This is Hawthorne, one of the greatest Ameri- 
can novelists! He didn't do anything by accident - he was a 
genius." 

Rachel/Rachelle: "I thought we were supposed to have opin- 
ions here. My opinion is that it's kind of hard to read, but the 
part about how Hester gets in trouble and the preacher guy al- 
most gets away with it, well, that's a good story. But I think 
you are making all this symbolism stuff up. I don't believe any 
of it." 

Hairwoman: "Do you tell your math teacher you don't believe 
that three times four equals twelve? Well, Hawthorne's sym- 
bolism is just like multiplication - once you figure it out, it's as 
clear as day." 

The bell rings. Hairwoman blocks the door to give out our as- 
signment. A five-hundred-word essay on symbolism, how to 
find hidden meanings in Hawthorne. The whole class yells at 
Rachel/Rachelle in the hall. 

That's what you get for speaking up. 



STUNTED 

Mr. Freeman has found a way around the authorities again. 
He painted the names of all his students on one wall of the 
classroom, then made a column for each week left of school. 
Each week he evaluates our progress and makes a note on the 
wall. He calls it a necessary compromise. 

Next to my name he's painted a question mark. My tree 
is frozen. A kindergartner could carve a better tree. I've 
stopped counting the linoleum blocks I ruined. Mr. Freeman 
has reserved the rest of them for me. Good thing, too. I am 
dying to try a different subject, something easy like designing 
an entire city or copying the Mona Lisa, but he won't budge. 
He suggested I try a different medium, so I used purple finger 
paints. The paint cooled my hands, but did nothing for my 
tree. Trees. 

On a shelf I find a book of landscapes filled with illustrations 
of every stinking tree that grows: sycamore, linden, aspen, 
willow, fir, tulip poplar, chestnut, elm, spruce, pine. Their 
bark, flowers, limbs, needles, nuts. I feel like a regular forester, 
but I can't do what I'm supposed to. The last time Mr. Free- 
man had anything good to say to me was when I made that 
stupid turkey-bone thing. 

Mr. Freeman is having his own problems. He mostly sits on 
his stool and stares at a new canvas. It is painted one color, so 
blue it's almost black. No light comes out of it or goes in, no 
shadows without light. Ivy asks him what it is. Mr. Freeman 
snaps out of his funk and looks at her like he just realized the 
room was full of students. 

Mr. Freeman: "It is Venice at night, the color of an accoun- 
tant's soul, a love rejected. I grew mold on an orange this 
color when I lived in Boston. It's the blood of imbeciles. Con- 
fusion. Tenure. The inside of a lock, the taste of iron. Despair. 
A city with the streetlights shot out. Smoker's lung. The hair 
of a small girl who grows up hopeless. The heart of a school 
board director ..." 

He is warming up for a full-fledged rant when the bell rings. 
Some teachers rumorwhisper he's having a breakdown. I think 
he's the sanest person I know. 



LUNCH DOOM 

Nothing good ever happens at lunch. The cafeteria is a giant 
sound stage where they film daily segments of Teenage Humil- 
iation Rituals. And it smells gross. 

I sit with Heather, as usual, but we are off by ourselves in a 
corner by the courtyard, not near the Marthas. Heather sits so 
her back is to the rest of the cafeteria. She can watch the wind 
shift the drifts of snow trapped in the courtyard behind me. I 
can feel the wind seep through the glass and penetrate my 
shirt. 

I am not listening too closely as Heather ahems her way to 
what is on her mind. The noise of four hundred mouths mov- 
ing, consuming, pulls me away from her. The background 
pulsing of the dishwashers, the squeal of announcements that 
no one hears - it is a vespiary, the Hornet haven. I am a small 
ant crouched by the entrance, with the winter wind at my 
back. I smother my green beans with mashed potatoes. 
Heather nibbles through her jicama and whole-grain roll, and 
blows me off while she eats her baby carrots. 

Heather: "This is really awkward. I mean, how do you say 
something like this? No matter what... no, I don't want to 
say that. I mean, we kind of paired up at the beginning of the 
year when I was new and didn't know anyone and that was 
really, really sweet of you, but I think it's time for us both to 
admit that we . . .just. . . are . . . very . . . different." 

She studies her no-fat yogurt. I try to think of something 
bitchy, something wicked and cruel. I can't. 

Me: "You mean we're not friends anymore?" 

Heather: [smiling with her mouth but not her eyes] "We were 
never really, really friends, were we? I mean, it's not like I ever 
slept over at your house or anything. We like to do different 
things. I have my modeling, and I like to shop ..." 

Me: "I like to shop." 

Heather: "You don't like anything. You are the most depressed 
person I've ever met, and excuse me for saying this, but you 
are no fun to be around and I think you need professional 
help." 

Up until this very instant, I had never seriously thought of 
Heather as my one true friend in the world. But now I am des- 
perate to be her pal, her buddy, to giggle with her, to gossip 
with her. 1 want her to paint my toenails. 

Me: "I was the only person who talked to you on the first day 
of school, and now you're blowing me off because I'm a little 
depressed? Isn't that what friends are for, to help each other 
out in bad times?" 

Heather: "I knew you would take this the wrong way. You are 
just so weird sometimes." 

I squint at the wall of hearts on the other side of the 
room. Lovers can spend five dollars to get a red or pink 
heart with their initials on it mounted on the wall for 
Valentine's Day. It looks so out of place, those red splotches 
on blue. The jocks - excuse me - the student athletes, sit 
in front of the hearts to judge the new romances. Poor 
Heather. There are no Hallmark cards for breaking up with 
friends. 

I know what she's thinking. She has a choice: she can hang 
out with me and get the reputation of being a creepy weirdo 
who might show up with a gun someday, or she can be a 
Martha - one of the girls who get good grades, do nice things, 
and ski well. Which would I choose? 

Heather: "When you get through this Life Sucks phase, I'm 
sure lots of people will want to be your friend. But you just 
can't cut classes or not show up to school. What's next - 
hanging out with the dopers?" 

Me: "Is this the part where you try to be nice to me?" 
Heather: "You have a reputation." 

Me: "For what?" 



Heather: "Look, you can't eat lunch with me anymore. I'm 
sorry. Oh, and don't eat those potato chips. They'll make you 
break out." 

She neatly wraps her trash into a wax-paper ball and deposits 
it in the garbage can. Then she walks to the Martha table. Her 
friends scootch down to make room for her. They swallow her 
whole and she never looks back at me. Not once. 



CONJUGATE THIS 



I cut class, you cut class, he, she, it cuts class. We cut class, 
they cut class. We all cut class. I cannot say this in Spanish, 
because I did not go to Spanish today. Gracias a dios. Hasta 
luego. 



CUTTING OUT HEARTS 



When we get off the bus on Valentine's Day, a girl with white- 
blond hair bursts into tears. "I Love You, Anjela!" is spray- 
painted into the snowbank along the parking lot. I don't 
know if Angela is crying because she is happy or because her 
heart's desire can't spell. Her honey is waiting with a red rose. 
They kiss right there in front of everybody. Happy Valentine's 
Day. 

It's caught me by surprise. Valentine Day's was a big hairy 
deal in elementary school because you had to give cards to 
everyone in your class, even the kid who made you step in dog 
poop. Then the class mom brought in pink frosted cupcakes 
and we traded those little candy hearts that said "Hot Baby!" 
and "Be Mine!" 

The holiday went underground in middle school. No parties. 
No shoe boxes with red cutout hearts for your drugstore 
valentines. To tell someone you liked them, you had to use 
layers and layers of friends, as in "Janet told me to tell you 
that Steven told me that Dougie said Carom was talking to 
April and she hinted that Sara's brother Mark has a friend 
named Tony who might like you. What are you going to do?" 

It is easier to floss with barbed wire than admit you like some- 
one in middle school. 

I go with the flow toward my locker. We are all dressed in 
down jackets and vests, so we collide and roll like bumper 
cars at the state fair. I notice envelopes taped to some lockers 
but don't really think about it until I find one on mine. It says 
"Melinda." It has to be a joke. Someone put it there to make 
me look stupid. I peer over my left shoulder, then my right, for 
groups of evil kids pointing at me. All I see are the backs of 
heads. 

What if it is real? What if it's from a boy? My heart stops, 
then stutters and pumps again. No, not Andy. His style is def- 
initely not romantic. Maybe David Petrakis My Lab Partner. 
He watches me when he thinks I can't see him, afraid I'm 
going to break lab equipment or faint again. Sometimes he 
smiles at me, an anxious smile, the kind you use on a dog that 
might bite. All I have to do is open the envelope. I can't stand 
it. I walk past my locker and go straight to biology. 

Ms. Keen decided it would be cute to review birds and bees in 
honor of Valentine's Day. Nothing practical, of course, no in- 
formation about why hormones can make you crazy, or why 
your face only breaks out at the worst time, or how to tell if 
somebody really gave you a Valentine's card on your locker. 
No, she really teaches us about the birds and the bees. Notes 
of love and betrayal are passed hand over hand as if the lab 
tables were lanes on Cupid's Highway. Ms. Keen draws a pic- 
ture of an egg with a baby chick inside it. 

David Petrakis is fighting to stay awake. Does he like me? I 
make him nervous. He thinks I'm going to ruin his grade. But 
maybe I'm growing on him. Do I want him to like me? I chew 
my thumbnail. No. I just want anyone to like me. I want a 
note with a heart on it. I pull the edge of my thumbnail back 
too far and it bleeds. I squeeze my thumb so the blood gathers 
in a perfect sphere before it collapses and slides toward the 
palm of my hand. David hands me a tissue. I press it into the 
cut. The white cells of paper dissolve as the red floods them. It 
doesn't hurt. Nothing hurts except the small smiles and 
blushes that flash across the room like tiny sparrows. 

I open my notebook and write a note to David: "Thanks!" I 
slide the notebook over to him. He swallows hard, his Adam's 
apple bouncing to the bottom of his neck and back up again. 
He writes back: "You are welcome." Now what? I squeeze the 
tissue harder on my thumb to concentrate. Ms. Keen's baby 
bird hatches on the board. I draw a picture of Ms. Keen as a 
robin. David smiles. He draws a branch under her feet and 
slides the notebook back to me. I try to connect the branch to 
a tree. It looks pretty good, better than anything I have drawn 
so far in art. The bell rings, and David's hand brushes against 
mine as he picks up his books. I bolt from my seat. I'm afraid 
to look at him. What if he thinks I already opened his card 
and I hate his guts, which was why I didn't say anything? But 
I can't say anything because the card could be a joke, or from 
some other silent watcher who blends in with the blur of lock- 
ers and doors. 

My locker. The card is still there, a white patch of hope with 
my name on it. I tear it off and open it. Something falls to my 
feet. The card has a picture of two cutesy teddy bears sharing 
a pot of honey. I open it. "Thanks for understanding. You're 
the sweetest!" It is signed with a purple pen. "Good Luck!!! 
Heather." 

I bend down to find what dropped from the card. It was the 
friendship necklace I had given Heather in a fit of insanity 
around Christmas. Stupid stupid stupid. How stupid could I 
be? I hear a cracking inside me, my ribs are collapsing in on 
my lungs, which is why I can't breathe. I stumble down the 
hall, down another hall, down another hall, till I find my very 
own door and slip inside and throw the lock, not even bother- 
ing to turn on the lights, just falling falling a mile downhill to 
the bottom of my brown chair, where I can sink my teeth into 
the soft white skin of my wrist and cry like the baby I am. I 
rock, thumping my head against the cinder-block wall. A half- 
forgotten holiday has unveiled every knife that sticks inside 
me, every cut. No Rachel, no Heather, not even a silly, geeky 
boy who would like the inside girl I think I am. 



OUR LADY OF THE WAITING ROOM 

I find Lady of Mercy Hospital by accident. I fall asleep on the 
bus and miss the mall completely. The hospital is worth a try. 
Maybe I can learn some pre-med stuff for David. 

In a sick kind of way, I love it. There are waiting rooms on al- 
most every floor. I don't want to attract too much attention to 
myself, so I stay on the move, checking my watch constantly, 
trying to look as if I have a reason for being here. I'm afraid 
I'll get caught, but the people around me have other things to 
worry about. The hospital is the perfect place to be invisible 
and the cafeteria food is better than the school's. 

The worst waiting room is on the heart-attack floor. It is 
crowded with gray-faced women twisting their wedding rings 
and watching the doors for a familiar doctor. One lady just 
sobs, she doesn't care that total strangers watch her nose drip 
or that people can hear her as soon as they get off the elevator. 
Her cries stop just short of screaming. They make me shiver. I 
snag a couple of copies of People magazine and I am out of 
there. 

The maternity ward is dangerous because people there are 
happy. They ask me questions, who am I waiting for, when is 
the baby due, is it my mother, a sister? If I wanted people to 
ask me questions, I would have gone to school. I say I have to 
call my father and flee. 

The cafeteria is cool. Huge. Full of people wearing doctor- 
nurse clothes with college-degree posture and beepers. I al- 
ways thought hospital people would be real health nuts, but 
these guys eat junk food like it's going out of style. Big piles of 
nachos, cheeseburgers as wide as plates, cherry pie, potato 
chips, all the good stuff. One lone cafeteria worker named 
Lola stands by the steamed-fish and onion tray. I feel bad 
for her, so I buy the fish platter. I also buy a plate of mashed 
potatoes and gravy and a yogurt. I find a seat next to a table 
of serious, frowning, silver-haired men who use words so 
long I'm surprised they don't choke. Very official. Nice to 
hang around people who sound like they know what they're 
doing. 

After lunch I wander up to the fifth floor, to an adult surgery 
wing where waiting family members concentrate on the televi- 
sion. I sit where I can watch the nurses' station and, beyond 
that, a couple of hospital rooms. It looks like a good place to 
get sick. The doctors and nurses seem smart, but they smile 
every once in a while. 

A laundry-room worker pushes an enormous basket of green 
hospital gowns (the kind that shows your butt if you don't 
hold it closed) to a storage area. I follow him. If anyone asks, 
I'm looking for a water fountain. No one asks. I pick up a 
gown. I want to put it on and crawl under the white knobbly 
blanket and white sheets in one of those high-off-the-ground 
beds and sleep. It is getting harder to sleep at home. How long 
would it take for the nurses to figure out I don't belong here? 
Would they let me rest for a few days? 

A stretcher pushed by a tall guy with muscles sweeps down 
the hall. One woman walks beside it, a nurse. I have no idea 
what is wrong with the patient, but his eyes are closed and a 
thin line of blood seeps through a bandage on his neck. 

I put the gown back. There is nothing wrong with me. These 
are really sick people, sick that you can see. I head for the ele- 
vator. The bus is on its way. 



CLASH OF THE TITANS 

We have a meeting with Principal Principal. Someone has no- 
ticed that I've been absent. And that I don't talk. They figure 
I'm more a head case than a criminal, so they call in the guid- 
ance counselor, too. 

Mother's mouth twitches with words she doesn't want to say 
in front of strangers. Dad keeps checking his beeper, hoping 
someone will call. 

I sip water from a paper cup. If the cup were lead crystal, I 
would open my mouth and take a bite. Crunch, crunch, swal- 
low. 

They want me to speak. 

"Why won't you say anything?" "For the love of God, open 
your mouth!" "This is childish, Melinda." "Say something." 
"You are only hurting yourself by refusing to cooperate." "I 
don't know why she's doing this to us." 

The Principal ha-hums loudly and gets in the middle. 

Principal Principal: "We all agree we are here to help. Let's 
start with these grades. They are not what we expected from 
you, Melissa." 

Dad: "Melinda." 

Principal Principal: "Melinda. Last year you were a straight-B 
student, no behavioral problem, few absences. But the reports 
I've been getting . . . well, what can we say?" 

Mother: "That's the point, she won't say anything! I can't get 
a word out of her. She's mute." 

Guidance Counselor: "I think we need to explore the family 
dynamics at play here." 

Mother: "She's jerking us around to get attention." 

Me: [inside my head] Would you listen? Would you believe 
me? Fat chance. 

Dad: "Well, something is wrong. What have you done to her? 
I had a sweet, loving little girl last year, but as soon as she 
comes up here, she clams up, skips school, and flushes her 
grades down the toilet. I golf with the school board president, 
you know." 

Mother: "We don't care who you know, Jack. We have to get 
Melinda to talk." 

Guidance Counselor: [leaning forward, looking at Mom and 
Dad] "Do the two of you have marriage issues?" 

Mother responds with unladylike language. Father suggests 
that the guidance counselor visit that hot, scary underground 
world. The guidance counselor grows quiet. Maybe she un- 
derstands why I keep it zipped. Principal Principal sits back in 
his chair and doodles a hornet. 

Tickticktick. I'm missing study hall for this. Nap time. How 
many days until graduation? I lost track. Have to find a calendar. 

Mother and Father apologize. They sing a show tune: "What 
are we to do? What are we to do? She's so blue, we're just 
two. What, oh what, are we supposed to do?" 

In my headworld, they jump on Principal Principal's desk and 
perform a tap-dance routine. A spotlight flashes on them. 
A chorus line joins in, and the guidance counselor dances 
around a spangled cane. I giggle. 

Zap. Back in their world. 

Mother: "You think this is funny? We are talking about your 
future, your life, Melinda!" 

Father: "I don't know where you picked up that slacker atti- 
tude, but you certainly didn't learn it at home. Probably from 
the bad influences up here." 

G.C.: "Actually, Melinda has some very nice friends. I've seen 
her helping that group of girls who volunteer so much. Meg 
Harcutt, Emily Briggs, Siobhan Falon ..." 

Principal Principal: [Stops doodling] "Very nice girls. They 
all come from good families." He looks at me for the first 
time and tilts his head to one side. "Those are your 
friends?" 

Do they choose to be so dense? Were they born that way? I 
have no friends. I have nothing. I say nothing. I am nothing. I 
wonder how long it takes to ride a bus to Arizona. 



MISS 

Merryweather In-School Suspension. This is my Consequence. 
It is in my contract. It's true what they tell you about not sign- 
ing anything without reading it carefully. Even better, pay a 
lawyer to read it carefully. 

The guidance counselor dreamed up the contract after our 
cozy get-together in the principal's office. It lists a million 
things I'm not supposed to do and the consequences I'll suffer 
if I do them. The consequences for minor offenses like being 
late to class or not participating were stupid - they wanted 
me to write an essay - so I took another day off school and 
Bingo! I earned a trip to MISS. 

It's a classroom painted white, with uncomfortable chairs and 
a lamp that buzzes like an angry hive. The inmates of MISS are 
commanded to sit and stare at the empty walls. It is supposed 
to bore us into submission or prepare us for an insane asylum. 

Our guard dog today is Mr. Neck. He curls his lip and growls 
at me. I think this is part of his punishment for that bigoted 
crap he pulled in class. There are two other convicts with me. 
One has a cross tattooed on his shaved skull. He sits like a 
graniteboy waiting for a chisel so he can carve himself out of 
the mountainside. The other kid looks completely normal. His 
clothes are a little freaky maybe, but that's a misdemeanor 
here, not a felony. When Mr. Neck gets up to greet a late ari- 
val, the normal-looking kid tells me he likes to start fires. 

Our last companion is Andy Evans. My breakfast turns to hy- 
drochloric acid. He grins at Mr. Neck and sits down next to me. 

Mr. Neck: "Cutting again, Andy?" 

Andy Beast: "No sir. One of your colleagues thinks I have an 
authority problem. Can you believe it?" 

Mr. Neck: "No more talking." 

I am BunnyRabbit again, hiding in the open. I sit like I have 
an egg in my mouth. One move, one word, and the egg will 
shatter and blow up the world. 

I am getting seriously weird in the head. 

When Mr. Neck isn't looking, Andy blows in my ear. 

I want to kill him. 



PICASSO 

I can't do anything, not even in art class. Mr. Freeman, a pro 
at staring out the window himself, thinks he knows what's 
wrong. "Your imagination is paralyzed," he declares. "You 
need to take a trip." Ears perk up all over the classroom and 
someone turns down the radio. A trip? Is he planning a field 
trip? "You need to visit the mind of a Great One," continues 
Mr. Freeman. Papers flutter as the class sighs. The radio sings 
louder again. 

He pushes my pitiful linoleum block aside and gently sets 
down an enormous book. "Picasso." He whispers like a 
priest. "Picasso. Who saw the truth. Who painted the truth, 
molded it, ripped from the earth with two angry hands." He 
pauses. "But I'm getting carried away." I nod. "See Picasso," 
he commands. "I can't do everything for you. You must walk 
alone to find your soul." 

Blah, blah, yeah. Looking at pictures would be better than 
watching snow drift. I open the book. 

Picasso sure had a thing for naked women. Why not draw 
them with their clothes on? Who sits around without a shirt 
on, plucking a mandolin? Why not draw naked guys, just to 
be fair? Naked women is art, naked guys a no-no, I bet. Prob- 
ably because most painters are men. 

I don't like the first chapters. Besides all the naked women, he 
painted these blue pictures, like he ran out of red and green 
for a few weeks. He painted circus people and some dancers 
who look like they are standing in smog. He should have 
made them cough. 

The next chapter steals my breath away. It takes me out of the 
room. It confuses me, while one little part of my brain jumps 
up and down screaming, "I get it! I get it!" Cubism. Seeing 
beyond what is on the surface. Moving both eyes and a nose 
to the side of the face. Dicing bodies and tables and guitars as 
if they were celery sticks, and rearranging them so that you 
have to really see them to see them. Amazing. What did the 
world look like to him? 

I wish he had gone to high school at Merry weather. I bet 
we could have hung out. I search the whole book and never 
see one picture of a tree. Maybe Picasso couldn't do trees 
either. Why did I get stuck with such a lame idea? I sketch 
a Cubist tree with hundreds of skinny rectangles for branches. 
They look like lockers, boxes, glass shards, lips with tri- 
angle brown leaves. I drop the sketch on Mr. Freeman's desk. 
"Now you're getting somewhere," he says. He gives me a 
thumbs-up. 


RIDING SHOTGUN 



I am a good girl. I go to every single class for a week. It feels 
good to know what the teachers are talking about again. My 
parents get the news flash from the guidance counselor. They 
aren't sure how to react - happy because I'm behaving, or an- 
grier still that they have to be happy about such a minor thing 
as a kid who goes to class every day. 

The guidance counselor convinces them I need a reward - a 
chew toy or something. They settle on new clothes. I'm out- 
growing everything I own. 

But shopping with my mother? Just shoot me and put me out 
of my misery. Anything but a shopping trip with Mom. She 
hates shopping with me. At the mall she stalks ahead, chin 
high, eyelids twitching because I won't try on the practical, 
"stylish" clothes she likes. Mother is the rock, I am the ocean. 
I have to pout and roll my eyes for hours until she finally 
wears down and crumbles into a thousand grains of beach 
sand. It takes a lot of energy. I don't think I have it in me. 

Apparently, Mom isn't up to the drag 'n' whine mall gig ei- 
ther. When they announce I've earned new clothes, they add 
that I have to get them at Effert's, so Mom can use her dis- 
count. I'm supposed to take the bus after school and meet her 
at the store. In a way, I'm glad. Get in, buy, get out, like rip- 
ping off a Band-Aid. 

It seems like a good idea until I'm standing at the bus stop in 
front of school as a blizzard rips through the county. The 
wind chill must be twenty below and I don't have a hat or 
mittens. I try keeping my back to the wind, but my rear end 
freezes. Facing it is impossible. The snow blows up under my 
eyelids and fills my ears. That's why I don't hear the car pull 
up next to me. When the horn blows, I nearly jump out of my 
skin. It's Mr. Freeman. "Need a ride?" 

Mr. Freeman's car shocks me. It is a blue Volvo, a safe Swedish 
box. I had him figured for an old VW bus. It is clean. I had vi- 
sions of art supplies, posters and rotting fruit everywhere. When 
I get in, classical music plays quietly. Will wonders never cease. 

He says dropping me off in the city is only a little out of his 
way. He'd love to meet my mother. My eyes widen in fear. 
"Maybe not," he says. I brush the melting snow from my 
head and hold my hands in front of the heating vent. He turns 
the fan up full-blast. 

As I thaw, I count the mileage markers on the side of the road, 
keeping an eye out for interesting roadkill. We get a lot of 
dead deer in the suburbs. Sometimes poor people take the 
venison for their winter's meat, but most of the time the car- 
casses rot until their skin hangs like ribbons over their bones. 
We head west to the big city. 

"You did a good job with that Cubist sketch," he says. I don't 
know what to say. We pass a dead dog. It doesn't have a col- 
lar. "I'm seeing a lot of growth in your work. You are learning 
more than you know." 

Me: "I don't know anything. My trees suck." 

Mr. Freeman puts on his turn signal, looks in the rearview 
mirror, pulls into the left lane, and passes a beer truck. "Don't 
be so hard on yourself. Art is about making mistakes and 
learning from them." He pulls back into the right lane. 

I watch the beer truck fade into the snowstorm in the side 
mirror. Part of me thinks maybe he is driving a bit too fast, 
what with all the snow, but the car is heavy and doesn't slip. 
The snow that had caked on my socks melts into my sneakers. 

Me: "All right, but you said we had to put emotion into our 
art. I don't know what that means. I don't know what I'm 
supposed to feel." My fingers fly up and cover my mouth. 
What am I doing? 

Mr. Freeman: "Art without emotion is like chocolate cake 
without sugar. It makes you gag." He sticks his finger down 
his throat. "The next time you work on your trees, don't 
think about trees. Think about love, or hate, or joy, or rage - 
whatever makes you feel something, makes your palms sweat 
or your toes curl. Focus on that feeling. When people don't 
express themselves, they die one piece at a time. You'd be 
shocked at how many adults are really dead inside - walking 
through their days with no idea who they are, just waiting for 
a heart attack or cancer or a Mack truck to come along and 
finish the job. It's the saddest thing I know." 

He pulls off the exit and stops at the light at the bottom of the 
ramp. Something small and furry and dead is crumpled by the 
storm sewer. I chew off a scab on my thumb. The Effert's sign 
blinks in the middle of the block. "Over there," I say. "You 
can drop me off in front." We sit for a moment, the snow hid- 
ing the other side of the street, a cello solo thrumming from 
the speakers. "Um, thanks," I say. "Don't mention it," he an- 
swers. "If you ever need to talk, you know where to find me." 
I unbuckle the seat belt and open the door. 

"Melinda," Mr. Freeman says. Snow filters into the car and 
melts on the dashboard. "You're a good kid. I think you have 
a lot to say. I'd like to hear it." 

I close the door. 



HALL OF MIRRORS 

I stop by the manager's office, and the secretary says my 
mother is on the phone. lust as well. It will be easier to find a 
pair of jeans without her around. I head for the "Young 
Ladies" section of the store. (Another reason they don't make 
any money. Who wants to be called a young lady?) 

I need a size ten, as much as it kills me to admit that. Every- 
thing I own is an eight or a small. I look at my canoe feet and 
my wet, obnoxious anklebones. Aren't girls supposed to stop 
growing at this age? 

When I was in sixth grade, my mom bought me all these 
books about puberty and adolescence, so I would appreciate 
what a "beautiful" and "natural" and "miraculous" transfor- 
mation I was going through. Crap. That's what it is. She com- 
plains all the time about her hair turning gray and her butt 
sagging and her skin wrinkling, but I'm supposed to be grate- 
ful for a face full of zits, hair in embarrassing places, and feet 
that grow an inch a night. Utter crap. 

No matter what I try on, I know I'll hate it. Effert's has 
cornered the market on completely unfashionable clothes. 
Clothes that grandmas buy for your birthday. It's a fashion 
graveyard. Just get a pair that fits, I tell myself. One pair - 
that's the goal. I look around. No Mom. I carry three pairs of 
the least offensive jeans into the dressing room. I am the only 
person trying anything on. The first pair is way too small - I 
can't even get them over my butt. I don't bother with the sec- 
ond pair; they are a smaller size. The third pair is huge. Ex- 
actly what I'm looking for. 

I scurry out to the three-way mirror. With an extra-large 
sweatshirt over the top, you can hardly tell that they are Ef- 
fert's jeans. Still no Mom. I adjust the mirror so I can see re- 
flections of reflections, miles and miles of me and my new 
jeans. I hook my hair behind my ears. I should have washed it. 
My face is dirty. I lean into the mirror. Eyes after eyes after 
eyes stare back at me. Am I in there somewhere? A thousand 
eyes blink. No makeup. Dark circles. I pull the side flaps of 
the mirror in closer, folding myself into the looking glass and 
blocking out the rest of the store. 

My face becomes a Picasso sketch, my body slicing into dis- 
secting cubes. I saw a movie once where a woman was burned 
over eighty percent of her body and they had to wash all 
the dead skin off. They wrapped her in bandages, kept her 
drugged, and waited for skin grafts. They actually sewed her 
into a new skin. 

I push my ragged mouth against the mirror. A thousand bleed- 
ing, crusted lips push back. What does it feel like to walk in a 
new skin? Was she completely sensitive like a baby, or numb, 
without nerve endings, just walking in a skin bag? I exhale 
and my mouth disappears in a fog. I feel like my skin has been 
burned off. I stumble from thornbush to thornbush - my 
mother and father who hate each other, Rachel who hates me, 
a school that gags on me like I'm a hairball. And Heather. 

I just need to hang on long enough for my new skin to graft. 
Mr. Freeman thinks I need to find my feelings. How can I not 
find them? They are chewing me alive like an infestation of 
thoughts, shame, mistakes. I squeeze my eyes shut. Jeans that 
fit, that's a good start. I have to stay away from the closet, go 
to all my classes. I will make myself normal. Forget the rest of 
it. 



GERMINATION 

We've finished the plant unit in biology. Ms. Keen drops ten- 
pound hints that the test will focus on seeds. I study. 

How seeds get planted: This is actually cool. Some plants spit 
their seeds into the wind. Others make seeds yummy enough 
drink cranberry-apricot juice. Too bad I can't buy stock in the 
juice company - I am watching a trend in the making. 

Are they talking about me? They're certainly laughing 
enough. I chomp my sandwich and it barfs mustard on my 
shirt. Maybe they're planning the next Project. They could 
mail snowballs to the weather-deprived children in Texas. 
They could knit goat-hair blankets for shorn sheep. I imagine 
what Heather might look like in ten years, after two children 
and seventy pounds. It helps a little. 

Rachel/Rachelle takes a seat at the end of my table with Hana, 
the exchange student from Egypt. Rachel/Rachelle is now ex- 
perimenting with Islam. She wears a scarf on her head and 
some brown-and-red gauzy harem pants. Her eyes are ringed 
with black eyeliner thick as crayon. I think I see her looking at 
me, but I'm probably wrong. Hana wears jeans and a Gap 
T-shirt. They eat hummus and pita and titter in French. 

There is a sprinkling of losers like me scattered among the 
happy teenagers, prunes in the oatmeal of school. The others 
have the social power to sit with other losers. I'm the only 
one sitting alone, under the glowing neon sign which reads, 
"Complete and Total Loser, Not Quite Sane. Stay Away. Do 
Not Feed." 

I go to the rest room to turn my shirt around so the mustard 
stain is hidden under my hair. 



SNOW DAY- 



SCHOOL AS USUAL 



We had eight inches of snow last night. In any other part of 
the country, that would mean a snow day. Not in Syracuse. 
We never get snow days. It snows an inch in South Carolina, 
everything shuts down and they get on the six o'clock news. 
In our district, they plow early and often and put chains on 
the bus tires. 

Hairwoman tells us they canceled school for a whole 
week back in the seventies because of the energy crisis. It 
was wicked cold and would have cost too much to heat 
the school. She looks wistful. Wistful - one-point vocab 
word. She blows her nose loudly and pops another smelly 
green cough drop. The wind blasts a snowdrift against the 
window. 

Our teachers need a snow day. They look unusually pale. The 
men aren't shaving carefully and the women never remove 
their boots. They suffer some sort of teacherflu. Their noses 
drip, their throats gum up, their eyes are rimmed with red. 
They come to school long enough to infect the staff room, 
then go home sick when the sub shows up. 

Hairwoman: "Open your books, now. Who can tell me what 
snow symbolized to Hawthorne?" 

Class: "Groan." 

Hawthorne wanted snow to symbolize cold, that's what I 
think. Cold and silence. Nothing quieter than snow. The sky 
screams to deliver it, a hundred banshees flying on the edge of 
the blizzard. But once the snow covers the ground, it hushes 
as still as my heart. 



STUPID STUPID 

I sneak into my closet after school because I can't face the idea 
of riding home on a busful of sweaty, smiling teeth sucking up 
my oxygen. I say hello to my poster of Maya and my Cubist 
tree. My turkey-bone scupture has fallen down again. I prop it 
up on the shelf next to the mirror. It slides back down and lies 
flat. I leave it there and curl up in my chair. The closet is warm 
and I'm ready for a nap. I've been having trouble sleeping at 
home. I wake up because the covers are on the floor or be- 
cause I'm standing at the kitchen door, trying to get out. It 
feels safer in my little hideaway. I doze off. 

I wake to the sound of girls screaming, "Be Aggressive, BE-BE 
Aggressive! B-E A-G-G-R-E-S-S-I-V-E!" 

For a minute there, I think that I've tripped into the land of 
the truly insane, but then a crowd roars. It is a basketball 
game, last game of the season. I check my watch - 8:45. I've 
been asleep for hours. I grab my backpack and fly down the 
hall. 

The noise of the gym pulls me in. I stand by the door for the 
last minute of the game. The crowd chants down the last sec- 
onds like it's New Year's Eve, then explode from the stands 
like angry hornets at the sound of the buzzer. We won, beating 
the Coatesville Cougars 5 1-50. The cheerleaders weep. The 
coaches embrace. I get caught up in the excitement and clap 
like a little girl. 

This is my mistake, thinking I belong. I should have bolted for 
home immediately. But I don't. I hang around. I want to be a 
part of it all. 

David Petrakis pushes toward the doors in the middle of a 
group of friends. He sees me looking at him and detaches him- 
self from his pod. 

David: "Melinda! Where were you sitting? Did you see 
that last shot? Unbelievable!! Unbefreakinglievable." He drib- 
bles an imaginary ball on the ground, fakes left, right, then 
pulls up for a shot. David should stick to human-rights 
abuses. He goes on and on, a loose ball racing downhill. 
To hear him talk, you'd think they just won the NBA champi- 
onship. Then he invites me back to his house for celebratory 
pizza. 

David: "Come on, Mel. You gotta come with us! My dad told 
me to bring anyone I wanted. We can give you a ride home 
after if you want. It'll be fun. You do remember fun, don't 
you?" 

Nope. I don't do parties. No thanks. I trot out excuses: home- 
work, strict parents, tuba practice, late-night dentist appoint- 
ment, have to feed the warthogs. I don't have a good track 
record with parties. 

David doesn't bother to analyze my reluctance. If he were a 
girl, maybe he would have pleaded or whined more. Guys 
don't do that. Yes/no. Stay/go. Suit yourself. See you Monday. 

I think it's some kind of psychiatric disorder when you have 
more than one personality in your head. That's what it feels 
like when I walk home. The two Melindas fight every step of 
the way. Melinda One is pissed that she couldn't go to the 
party. 

Melinda One: "Get a life. It was just pizza. He wasn't going to 
try anything. His parents were going to be there! You worry 
too much. You're never going to let us have any fun, are you? 
You're going to turn into one of those weird old ladies who 
has a hundred cats and calls the cops when kids cut across her 
back yard. I can't stand you." 

Melinda Two waits for One to finish her tantrum. Two care- 
fully watches the bushes along the sidewalk for a lurking bo- 
geyman or worse. 

Melinda Two: "The world is a dangerous place. You don't 
know what would have happened. What if he was just saying 
his parents were going to be there? He could have been lying. 
You can never tell when people are lying. Assume the worst. 
Plan for disaster. Now hurry up and get us home. I don't like 
it out here. It's too dark." 

If I kick both of them out of my head, who would be left? 


A NIGHT TO REMEMBER 



I can't sleep after the game. Again. I spend a couple hours tun- 
ing AM radio to the weird bounces of night. I listen to jabber- 
jabber from Quebec, a farm report from Minnesota, and a 
country station in Nashville. I crawl out my window onto the 
porch roof and wrap myself in all my blankets. 

A fat white seed sleeps in the sky. 

Slush is frozen over. People say that winter lasts forever, but 
it's because they obsess over the thermometer. North in the 
mountains, the maple syrup is trickling. Brave geese punch 
through the thin ice left on the lake. Underground, pale seeds 
roll over in their sleep. Starting to get restless. Starting to 
dream green. 

The moon looked closer back in August. 

Rachel got us to the end-of-summer party, a cheerleader party, 
with beer and seniors and music. She blackmailed her brother, 
Jimmy, to drive us. We were all sleeping over at Rachel's 
house. Her mother thought Jimmy was taking us roller- 
skating. 

It was at a farm a couple of miles from our development. The 
kegs were in the barn where the speakers were set up. Most 
people hung at the edge of the lights. They looked like models 
in a blue-jeans ad, thinthinthin, big lips, big earrings, white 
smiles. I felt like such a little kid. 

Rachel found a way to fit in, of course. She knew a lot of peo- 
ple because of Jimmy. I tasted a beer. It was worse than cough 
medicine. I gulped it down. Another beer and one more, then 
I worried I would throw up. I walked out of the crowd, to- 
ward the woods. The moon shone on the leaves. I could see 
the lights, like stars strung in the pines. Somebody giggled, 
hidden beyond the dark, quiet boygirl whispers. I couldn't see 
them. 

A step behind me. A senior. And then he was talking to me, 
flirting with me. This gorgeous cover-model guy. His hair was 
way better than mine, his every inch a tanned muscle, and 
he had straight white teeth. Flirting with me! Where was 
Rachel - she had to see this! 

Greek God: "Where did you come from? You're too beautiful 
to hide in the dark. Come dance with me." 

He took my hand and pulled me close to him. I breathed in 
cologne and beer and something I couldn't identify. I fit in 
against his body perfectly, my head level with his shoulder. I 
was a little dizzy - I laid my cheek on his chest. He wrapped 
one arm around my back. His other hand slid down to my 
butt. I thought that was a little rude, but my tongue was thick 
with beer and I couldn't figure out how to tell him to 
slow down. The music was sweet. This was what high school 
was supposed to feel like. Where was Rachel? She had to see 
this! 

He tilted my face up to his. He kissed me, man kiss, 
hard sweet and deep. Nearly knocked me off my feet, that 
kiss. And I thought for just a minute there that I had a 
boyfriend, I would start high school with a boyfriend, older 
and stronger and ready to watch out for me. He kissed me 
again. His teeth ground hard against my lips. It was hard to 
breathe. 

A cloud cloaked the moon. Shadows looked like photo nega- 
tives. 

"Do you want to?" he asked. 

What did he say? I didn't answer. I didn't know. I didn't 
speak. 

We were on the ground. When did that happen? "No." No I 
did not like this. I was on the ground and he was on top of 
me. My lips mumble something about leaving, about a friend 
who needs me, about my parents worrying. I can hear my- 
self - I'm mumbling like a deranged drunk. His lips lock on 
mine and I can't say anything. I twist my head away. He is so 
heavy. There is a boulder on me. I open my mouth to breathe, 
to scream, and his hand covers it. In my head, my voice is as 
clear as a bell: "NO I DON'T WANT TO!" But I can't spit it out. 
I'm trying to remember how we got on the ground and where 
the moon went and wham! shirt up, shorts down, and the 
ground smells wet and dark and NO! - I'm not really here, 
I'm definitely back at Rachel's, crimping my hair and gluing 
on fake nails, and he smells like beer and mean and he hurts 
me hurts me hurts me and gets up and zips his jeans and smiles. 

The next thing I saw was the telephone. I stood in the middle 
of a drunken crowd and I called 911 because I needed help. 
All those visits from Officer Friendly in second grade paid off. 
A lady answered the phone, "Police, state your emergency," 
and I saw my face in the window over the kitchen sink and no 
words came out of my mouth. Who was that girl? I had never 
seen her before. Tears oozed down my face, over my bruised 
lips, pooling on the handset. "It's OK," said the nice lady on 
the phone. "We have your location. Officers are on the way. 
Are you hurt? Are you being threatened?" Someone grabbed 
the phone from my hands and listened. A scream - the cops 
were coming! Blue and cherry lights flashing in the kitchen- 
sink window. Rachel's face - so angry - in mine. Someone 
slapped me. I crawled out of the room through a forest of 
legs. Outside, the moon smiled goodbye and slipped away. 

I walked home to an empty house. Without a word. 

It isn't August. The moon is asleep and I'm sitting on my 
porch roof like a frozen gargoyle, wondering if the sun is go- 
ing to blow off the world today and sleep in. 

There is blood on the snow. I bit my lip clear through. It needs 
stitches. Mom will be late again. I hate winter. I've lived in 
Syracuse my whole life and I hate winter. It starts too early 
and ends too late. No one likes it. Why does anyone stay 
here? 


MY REPORT CARD: 

Social Life F Social Studies F Spanish D Art A 

Lunch D Biology D+ Algebra F 

Clothes F English D+ Gym D 



FOURTH MARKING PERIOD 



EXTERMINATORS 



The PTA has started a petition to get rid of the Hornet as our 
school mascot. It was the cheer that got to them. They heard 
it at the last basketball game. 

"WE ARE THE HORNETS, 
HORNY, HORNY HORNETS! 
EVERYWHERE WE GO-OH, 
PEOPLE WANT TO KNO-OOW, 
WHO WE ARE, SO WE TELL THEM . . . 
WE ARE THE HORNETS, 
HORNY, HORNY HORNETS! 

(and on and on and on) 

The wiggles and shakes that accompany the cheer freaked out 
the Merryweather PTA. Freaked out PTAs all over the city 
when the Horny Hornet cheer was televised. The TV sports 
guy thought the song was cute, so he did a segment show- 
ing the "Hornet Hustle," with the cheerleaders shaking their 
stingers, and the crowd bumping and grinding their horny 
Hornet heinies. 

The student council started a counterpetition. The Honor So- 
ciety wrote it. It describes the psychological harm we have all 
suffered from this year's lack of identity. It pleads for consis- 
tency, stability. It's pretty good: "We, the students of Merry- 
weather High, have become proud of our Hornet selves. We 
are tenacious, stinging, clever. We are a hive, a community of 
students. Don't take away our Hornetdom. We are Hornets." 

It won't be a real issue until football starts up again. Our 
baseball team always stinks. 



THE WET SEASON 

Spring is on the way. The winter rats - rusty brown $700 cars 
that everyone with sense drives from November until April - 
are rolling back into storage. The snow is melting for good 
and the pretty-baby shiny cars glitter in the senior parking lot. 

There are other signs of spring. Front lawns cough up the 
shovels and mittens that were gobbled by snowdrifts in Janu- 
ary. My mother moved the winter coats up to the attic. Dad's 
been mumbling about the storm windows, but hasn't taken 
them down. From the bus I saw a farmer walking his field, 
waiting for the mud to tell him when to plant. 

April Fool's Day is when most seniors get their acceptance or 
rejection letters from college. Thumbs up or thumbs down. It's 
a sick piece of timing. Tensions are running high. Kids drink 
pink stomach medicine from the bottle. David Petrakis My 
Lab Partner is writing a database program to track who got 
in where. He wants to analyze which advanced-placement 
classes the seniors took, their standardized test scores, ex- 
tracurricular, and GPAs to figure out what he needs to do to 
get into Harvard. 

I've been going to most of my classes. Good girl, Mellie. Roll 
over, Mellie. Sit, Mellie. No one has patted me on the head, 
though. I passed an algebra test, I passed an English test, I 
passed a biology test. Well, hallelujah. It is all so profoundly 
stupid. Maybe this is why kids join clubs - to give them some- 
thing to think about during class. 

Andy Beast joined the International Club. I hadn't figured him 
for a deep interest in Greek cooking or French museums. He 
has abandoned the Martha table and hangs around and onto 
Rachel/Rachelle and Greta-Ingrid and all the other resident 
aliens. Rachel/Rachelle flutters her purple eyelashes at him 
like he's some kind of Uberdude. You'd think she'd have more 
sense. 

Easter came and went without much notice. I think it caught 
my mother by surprise. She doesn't like Easter because the 
date keeps shifting and it's not a big shopping holiday. When I 
was a kid, Mom used to hide colored eggs for me all over the 
house. The last egg was inside a big basket of chocolate rab- 
bits and yellow marshmallow chicks. Before my grandparents 
died, they would take me to church and I would wear stiff 
dresses with itchy lace. 

This year we celebrated by eating lamb chops. I made 
hard-boiled eggs for lunch and drew little faces on them 
with a black pen. Dad complained about how much 
yard work has to be done. Mom didn't say much. I said 
less. In heaven, my grandparents frowned. I sort of wished 
we had gone to church. Some of the Easter songs are 
pretty. 


SPRING BREAK 



It is the last day of Spring Break. My house is shrinking and I 
feel like Alice in Wonderland. Afraid that my head might burst 
through the roof, I head for the mall. I have ten bucks in my 
pocket - what to spend it on? French fries - ten dollars' worth 
of french fries, ultimate fantasy. If Alice in Wonderland were 
written today, I bet she'd have a supersized order of fries that 
said "Eat me," instead of a small cake. On the other hand, 
we're rushing toward summer, which means shorts and 
T-shirts and maybe even a bathing suit now and then. I walk 
past the deep-fat fryers. 

Now that spring is past, the fall fashions are in the store win- 
dows. I keep waiting for the year when the fashions catch up 
to the seasons. A couple of stores have performance artists 
hanging at the front door. One guy keeps flying a stupid loop- 
the-loop airplane; a plastic-faced woman keeps tying and re- 
tying a shawl. No, now it's a skirt. Now it's a halter top. Now 
it's a head scarf. People avoid looking at her, as if they aren't 
sure if they should applaud or tip her. I feel bad for her - I 
wonder what her grades were in high school. I want to give 
her a tip, only it would be rude to ask if she has change for a 
ten. 

I ride the escalator down to the central fountain, where to- 
day's entertainment is face-painting. The line is long and 
loud - six-year-olds and their mothers. A little girl walks past 
me - she's a tiger. She's crying about ice cream and she wipes 
her tears. Her tiger paint smears and her mom yells at her. 

"What a zoo." 

I turn. Ivy is sitting on the edge of the fountain, a giant sketch- 
book balanced on her knees. She nods toward the line of 
whiners and the face painters furiously coloring stripes, spots, 
and whiskers. 

"I feel bad for them," I say. "What are you drawing?" 

Ivy moves so I can sit next to her and hands me the sketch- 
book. She's drawing the kids' faces. Half of each face is plain 
and sad, the other half is plastered with thick clown makeup 
that is fake-happy. She hasn't painted any tigers or leopards. 

"The last time I was here, they were doing clown faces. No 
such luck today," Ivy explains. 

"Looks good, though," I say. "It's kind of spooky. Not creepy, 
but unexpected." I hand back the sketchbook. 

Ivy pokes her pencil into her bun. "Good. That's what I'm 
trying for. That turkey-bone thing you did was creepy, too. 
Creepy in a good way, good creepy. It's been months and I'm 
still thinking about it." 

What am I supposed to say now? I bite my lip, then release it. I 
pull a roll of Life Savers from my pocket. "Want a piece?" She 
takes one, I take three, and we suck in silence for a moment. 

"How's the tree coming?" she asks. 

I groan. "Stinks. It was a mistake to sign up for art. I just 
couldn't see myself taking wood shop." 

"You're better than you think you are," Ivy says. She opens to 
an empty page in the sketchbook. "I don't know why you 
keep using a linoleum block. If I were you, I'd just let it out, 
draw. Here - try a tree." 

We sit there trading pencils. I draw a trunk, Ivy adds a branch, 
I extend the branch, but it is too long and spindly. I start to 
erase it, but Ivy stops me. "It's fine the way it is, it just needs 
some leaves. Layer the leaves and make them slightly different 
sizes and it will look great. You have a great start there." 

She's right. 



GENETICS 

The last unit of the year in biology is genetics. It's impossible 
to listen to Ms. Keen. Her voice sounds like a cold engine that 
won't turn over. The lecture starts with some priest named 
Greg who studied vegetables, and ends up with an argument 
about blue eyes. I think I missed something - how did we leap 
from veggies to eye color? I'll copy David's notes. 

I flip ahead in the textbook. There's an interesting chapter 
about acid rain. Nothing about sex. We aren't scheduled to 
learn about that until eleventh grade. 

David draws a chart in his notebook. I snap my pencil point 
and walk to the front of the room to sharpen it. I figure the 
walk will do me good. Ms. Keen sputters on. We get half our 
genes from our mother and half from our father. I thought my 
jeans came from Effert's. Ha-ha, biology joke. 

Mom says I take after Dad's side of the family. They're mostly 
cops and insurance salesmen who bet on football games and 
smoke disgusting cigars. Dad says I take after Mom's side of 
the family. They're farmers who grow rocks and poison ivy. 
They don't say much, visit dentists, or read. 

When I was a little kid, I used to pretend I was a princess who 
had been adopted when my kingdom was overrun by bad 
guys. Any day my real parents, Mr. King and Mrs. Queen, 
would send the royal limo to pick me up. I just about had 
a seven-year-old heart attack when my dad took a limo to 
the airport the first time. I thought they had really come to 
take me away and I didn't want to go. Dad took taxis after 
that. 

I look out the window. No limos. No chariots or car- 
riages. Now, when I really want to leave, no one will give me 
a ride. 

I sketch a willow tree drooping into the water. I won't show it 
to Mr. Freeman. This one is for my closet. I've been taping 
some of my drawings on the walls. Any more classes as boring 
as this one and I'll be ready to move back in there full-time. 
My leaves are good, natural. The trick is to make them differ- 
ent sizes, and then crowd them one on top of another. Ivy was 
right. 

Ms. Keen writes "Dominant/Recessive" on the board. I look at 
David's notes. He's drawing a family tree. David got his hair 
gene from his dad and his eye gene from his mom. I draw a 
family tree. A family stump. There aren't that many of us. I can 
barely remember their names. Uncle Jim, Uncle Thomas, Aunt 
Mary, Aunt Kathy - there's another aunt, she is very recessive. 
She recessed herself all the way to Peru. I think I have her eyes. 
I got my "I don't want to know about it" gene from my dad 
and my "I'll think about it tomorrow" gene from my mom. 



Ms. Keen says we'll have a quiz the next day. I wish I had paid 
attention during class. I wish I were adopted. I wish David 
would quit sighing when I ask to copy his notes. 



TEN MORE LIES THEY TELL YOU IN HIGH SCHOOL 

1. You will use algebra in your adult lives. 

2. Driving to school is a privilege that can be taken away. 

3. Students must stay on campus for lunch. 

4. The new textbooks will arrive any day now. 

5. Colleges care about more than your SAT scores. 

6. We are enforcing the dress code. 

7. We will figure out how to turn off the heat soon. 

8. Our bus drivers are highly trained professionals. 

9. There is nothing wrong with summer school. 
10. We want to hear what you have to say. 



MY LIFE AS A SPY 



Rachel/Rachelle has lost her mind. She has flipped. She went 
to the movies with Andy Beast and her exchange friends and 
now she follows after him, panting like a bichon frise. 1 Ifl 
wears her buddy Greta-Ingrid draped around his neck like a 
white scarf. When he spits, I bet Rachel/Rachelle catches it in 
a cup and saves it. 

Rachel/Rachelle and some other twit natter about the 
movie date before Mr. Stetman starts class. I want to puke. 
Rachel/Rachelle is just "Andythis" and "Andythat." Could 
she be more obvious? I close my ears to her stupid asthmatic 
laugh and work on the homework that was due yesterday. 

It is usually easy to do homework in class because Mr. Stet- 
man's voice creates a gentle, white-noise sound barrier. I can't 
do it today, I can't escape the arguments circling my head. 
Why worry about Rachel/Rachelle? (He'll hurt her.) Had she 
done a single decent thing for me the whole year? (She was my 
best friend through middle school, that counts for something.) 
No, she's a witch and a traitor. (She didn't see what hap- 
pened.) Let her lust after the Beast; I hope he breaks her heart. 
(What if he breaks something else?) 

When class is over, I slide into the middle of the pack pushing 
out the door before Mr. Stetman can bust me for the home- 
work. Rachel/Rachelle shoves past me to where Greta-Ingrid 
and a short kid from Belgium are waiting. I tail them, always 
keeping two bodies between us like the detectives on televi- 
sion. They're on their way to the foreign-language wing. 
That's no surprise. The foreign kids are always there, like 
they need to breathe air scented with their native language a 
couple times a day or they'll choke to death on too much 
American. 

Andy Beast swoops over their heads, folds his wings, and sets 
himself between the girls as they start up the stairs. He tries to 
kiss Greta-Ingrid's cheek, but she turns away. He kisses 
Rachel/Rachelle's cheek and she giggles. He does not kiss the 
cheek of the short Belgian. The Belgian and the Swede wave 
"ciao" at the office of the Foreign Language Department. Ru- 
mor has it that there is an espresso maker in there. 

The friendly momentum keeps Rachel/Rachelle and Andy 
walking all the way to the end of the hall. I face a corner and 
pretend to study algebra. I figure that's enough to make me 
unrecognizable. They sit on the floor, Rachel/Rachelle in a full 
lotus. Andy steals Rachel/Rachelle's notebook. She whines like 
a baby and throws herself across his lap to get it back. I shiver 
with goose bumps. He tosses the notebook from one hand to 
the other, always keeping it just out of her reach. Then he says 
something to her. I can't hear it. The hall sounds like a packed 
football stadium. His lips move poison and she smiles and 
then she kisses him wet. Not a Girl Scout kiss. He gives her 
the notebook. His lips move. Lava spills out my ears. She is 
not any part of a pretend Rachelle-chick. I can only see third- 
grade Rachel who liked barbecue potato chips and who 
braided pink embroidery thread into my hair that I wore for 
months until my mom made me cut it out. I rest my forehead 
against the prickly stucco. 



THIN ATMOSPHERE 

The best place to figure this out is my closet, my throne room, 
my foster home. I want a shower. Maybe I should tell 
Greta-Ingrid. (My Swedish isn't good enough.) I could talk to 
Rachel. (Yeah, right.) I could say I'd heard bad things about 
Andy. (It would only make him more attractive.) I could 
maybe tell her what happened. (As if she'd listen. What if she 
told Andy? What would he do?) 

There isn't much room for pacing. I take two steps, turn, two 
steps back. I bang my shin against the chair. Stupid room. 
What a dumb idea, sitting in a closet like this. I flop in the 
chair. It whooshes out old janitor smells - feet, beef jerky, 
shirts left in the washer too long. The turkey-bone sculpture 
gives off a faint rotting odor. Three baby-food jars of pot- 
pourri don't make a dent in the stink. Maybe there's a dead 
rat decomposing in the wall, right near the hot-air vent. 

Maya Angelou watches me, two fingers on the side of her 
face. It is an intelligent pose. Maya wants me to tell Rachel. 

I take off my sweatshirt. My T-shirt sticks to me. They still 
have the heat running full-blast even though it's warm enough 
to crack open the windows. That's what I need, a window. As 
much as I complain about winter, cold air is easier to breathe, 
slipping like silver mercury down my lungs and out again. 
April is humid, with slush evaporating or rain drizzling. A 
warm, moldy washcloth of a month. 

The edges of my pictures curl in the damp. There has been 
some progress in this whole tree project, I guess. Like Picasso, 
I've gone through different phases. There's the Confused Pe- 
riod, when I wasn't sure what the assignment really was. The 
Spaz Period, when I couldn't draw a tree to save my life. The 
Dead Period, when all my trees looked like they had been 
through a forest fire or a blight. I'm getting better. Don't 
know what to call this phase yet. All these drawings make the 
closet seem smaller. Maybe I should bribe a janitor to haul all 
this stuff to my house, make my bedroom more like this, more 
like home. 

Maya taps me on the shoulder. I'm not listening. I know I 
know, I don't want to hear it. I need to do something about 
Rachel, something for her. Maya tells me without saying any- 
thing. I stall. Rachel will hate me. (She already hates me.) She 
won't listen. (I have to try.) I groan and rip out a piece of 
notebook paper. I write her a note, a left-handed note, so she 
won't know it's from me. 

"Andy Evans will use you. He is not what he pretends to be. I 
heard he attacked a ninth-grader. Be very, very careful. A 
Friend. RS. Tell Greta-Ingrid, too." 

I didn't want the Swedish supermodel on my conscience either. 



GROWING PAINS 

Mr. Freeman is a jerk. Instead of leaving me alone to "find my 
muse" (a real quote, I swear), he lands on the stool next to me 
and starts criticizing. What is wrong with my tree? He over- 
flows with words describing how bad it sucks. It's stiff, unnat- 
ural, it doesn't flow. It is an insult to trees everywhere. 

I agree. My tree is hopeless. It isn't art; it's an excuse not to 
take sewing class. I don't belong in Mr. Freeman's room any 
more than I belong in the Marthas or in my little-girl pink 
iK'iiroom. This is where the real artists belong, like Ivy. I 
i.iny the linoleum block to the garbage can and throw it 
in hard enough to make everyone look at me. Ivy frowns 
through her wire sculpture. I sit back down and lay my head 
on the table. Mr. Freeman retrieves the block from the gar- 
Mge. He brings back the Kleenex box, too. How could he tell 
1 was crying? 

Mr. Freeman: "You are getting better at this, but it's not good 
enough. This looks like a tree, but it is an average, ordinary, 
everyday, boring tree. Breathe life into it. Make it bend - trees 
are flexible, so they don't snap. Scar it, give it a twisted 
branch - perfect trees don't exist. Nothing is perfect. Flaws 
are interesting. Be the tree." 

He has this ice-cream voice like a kindergarten teacher. If he 
thinks I can do it, then I'll try one more time. My fingers tip- 
tip over to the linoleum knife. Mr. Freeman pats my shoulder 
once, then turns to make someone else miserable. I wait until 
he isn't watching, then try to carve life into my flat linoleum 
square. 

Maybe I could carve off all the linoleum and call it "Empty 
Block." If a famous person did that, it would probably be 
really popular and sell for a fortune. If I do it, I'll flunk. "Be 
the tree." What kind of advice is that? Mr. Freeman has been 
hanging out with too many New Age weirdos. I was a tree in 
the second-grade play because I made a bad sheep. I stood 
there with my arms outstretched like branches and my head 
drooping in the breeze. It gave me sore arms. I doubt trees are 
ever told to "be the screwed-up ninth-grader." 


GAG ORDER 



David Petrakis's lawyer had a meeting with Mr. Neck and 
some kind of teacher lawyer. Guess who won. I bet David 
could skip class the rest of the year if he wanted and still get 
an A. Which he would never do. But you better believe that 
whenever David raises his hand, Mr. Neck lets him talk as 
much as he wants. David, quiet David, is full of long, drawn- 
out, rambling opinions about social studies. The rest of the 
class is grateful. We bow down to the Almighty David, Who 
Keeps the Neck Off Our Backs. 

Unfortunately, Mr. Neck still gives tests, and most of us fail 
them. Mr. Neck makes an announcement: anyone who is 
flunking can write an extra-credit report on a Cultural Influ- 
ence at the Turn of the Century. (He skipped the Industrial 
Revolution so he could drag our class past the year 1900.) He 
does not want all of us in summer school. 

I don't want to see him in summer school either. I write about 
the suffragettes. Before the suffragettes came along, women 
were treated like dogs. 

* Women could not vote 
*W6men could not own property 

* Women were not allowed in many schools 

They were dolls, with no thoughts, or opinions, or voices of 
their own. Then the suffragettes marched in, full of loud, 
in-your-face ideas. They got arrested and thrown in jail, but 
nothing shut them up. They fought and fought until they 
earned the rights they should have had all along. 

I write the best report ever. Anything I copy from a book, I 
put in quotes and footnotes (feetnote?). I use books, magazine 
articles, and a videotape. I think about looking for an old suf- 
fragette in a nursing home, but they are probably all dead. 

I even hand it in on time. Mr. Neck scowls. He looks down on 
me and says, "To get credit for the report, you have to deliver 
it orally. Tomorrow. At the beginning of class." 

Me: 



NO IUSTICE, NO PEACE 

There is no way I'm reading my suffragette report in front of 
the class. That wasn't part of the original assignment. Mr. 
Neck changed it at the very last second because he wants to 
flunk me or hates me or something. But I've written a really 
good report and I'm not going to let an idiot teacher jerk me 
around like this. I ask David Petrakis for advice. We come up 
with a Plan. 

I get to class early, when Mr. Neck is still in the lounge. I write 
what I need to on the board and cover the words with a suf- 
fragette protest sign. My box from the copy shop is on the 
floor. Mr. Neck walks in. He grumbles that I can go first. I 
stand suffragette tall and calm. It is a lie. My insides feel like 
I'm caught in a tornado. My toes curl inside my sneak- 
ers, trying to grip the floor so I won't get sucked out the 
window. 

Mr. Neck nods at me. I pick up my report as if I'm going to 
read it out loud. I stand there, papers trembling as if a breeze 
is blowing through the closed door. I turn around and rip my 
poster off the blackboard. 

THE SUFFRAGETTES FOUGHT FOR THE RIGHT TO SPEAK. 
THEY WERE ATTACKED, ARRESTED, AND THROWN IN JAIL 
FOR DARING TO DO WHAT THEY WANTED. LIKE THEY WERE, 
I AM WILLING TO STAND UP FOR WHAT I BELIEVE. NO ONE 
SHOULD BE FORCED TO GIVE SPEECHES. I CHOOSE TO STAY 
SILENT. 

The class reads slowly, some of them moving their lips. Mr. 
Neck turns around to see what everyone is staring at. I nod at 
David. He joins me at the front of the room and I hand him 
my box. 

David: "Melinda has to deliver her report to the class as part 
of the assignment. She made copies everyone can read." 

He passes out the copies. They cost me $6.72 at the office- 
supply store. I was going to make a cover page and color it, 
but I haven't gotten much allowance recently, so I just put the 
title at the top of the first page. 

My plan is to stand in front of the class for the five minutes I 
was given for my presentation. The suffragettes must have 
planned out and timed their protests, too. Mr. Neck has other 
plans. He gives me a D and escorts me to the authorities. I for- 
got about how the suffragettes were hauled off to jail. Duh. I 
go on a tour of the guidance counselor's office, Principal Prin- 
cipal's, and wind up back in MISS. I am back to being a Dis- 
cipline Problem again. 

I need a lawyer. I showed up every day this semester, sat my 
butt in every class, did some homework, and didn't cheat on 
tests. I still get slammed in MISS. There is no way they can 
punish me for not speaking. It isn't fair. What do they know 
about me? What do they know about the inside of my head? 
Flashes of lightning, children crying. Caught in an avalanche, 
pinned by worry, squirming under the weight of doubt, guilt. 
Fear. 

The walls in MISS are still white. Andy Beast isn't here. 
Thank God for small favors. A boy with lime-colored hair 
who looks like he's channeling for an alien species dozes; two 
Goths in black velvet dresses and artfully torn pantyhose 
trade Mona Lisa smiles. They cut school to stand in line for 
killer concert tickets. MISS is a small price to pay for Row 10, 
seats 21 and 22. 

I simmer. Lawyers on TV always tell their clients not to say 
anything. The cops say that thing: "Anything you say will be 
used against you." Self-incrimination. I looked it up. Three- 
point vocab word. So why does everyone make such a big 
hairy deal about me not talking? Maybe I don't want to in- 
criminate myself. Maybe I don't like the sound of my voice. 
Maybe I don't have anything to say. 

The boy with the lime-colored hair wakes up when he falls 
out of his chair. The Gothgirls whinny. Mr. Neck picks his 
nose when he thinks we aren't looking. I need a lawyer. 



ADVICE FROM A SMART MOUTH 

David Petrakis sends me a note in social studies. Typed. He 
thinks it's horrible that my parents didn't videotape Mr. Neck's 
class or stick up for me the way his folks did. It feels so good to 
have someone feel sorry for me, I don't mention that my parents 
don't know what happened. They'll figure out what happened 
soon enough at the next meeting with the guidance counselor. 

I think David should be a judge. His latest career goal is to be 
a quantum-physics genius. I don't know what that means, but 
he says his father is furious. His dad is right - David was 
made for the law: deadly calm, turbo-charged brain, and a 
good eye for weakness. 

He stops by my locker. I tell him Mr. Neck gave me a D for 
the suffragette report. 

David: "He has a point." 

Me: "It was a great report! You read it. I wrote a bibliography 
and I didn't copy from the encyclopedia. It was the best report 
ever. It's not my fault Mr. Neck doesn't get performance art." 

David pauses to offer me a stick of gum. It's a delaying tactic, 
the kind that juries love. 

David: "But you got it wrong. The suffragettes were all about 
speaking up, screaming for their rights. You can't speak up 
for your right to be silent. That's letting the bad guys win. If 
the suffragettes did that, women wouldn't be able to vote 
yet." 

I blow a bubble in his face. He folds the gum wrappers into 
tiny triangles. 

David: "Don't get me wrong. I think what you did was 
kind of cool and getting stuck in MISS wasn't fair. But 
don't expect to make a difference unless you speak up for 
yourself." 

Me: "Do you lecture all your friends like this?" 
David: "Only the ones I like." 

We both chew on this for a minute. The bell rings. I 
keep looking in my locker for a book that I already 
know isn't there. David checks his watch a hundred 
times. We hear Principal Principal bellow, "Let's move it, 
people!" 

David: "Maybe I'll call you." 

Me: "Maybe I won't answer." Chew, chew. Blowbubblepop. 
"Maybe I will." 

Is he asking me out? I don't think so. But he kind of is. I guess 
I'll answer if he calls. But if he touches me I'll explode, so a 
date is out of the question. No touching. 


THE BEAST PROWLS 



I stay after school to work on tree sketches. Mr. Freeman 
helps me for a while. He gives me a roll of brown paper and a 
piece of white chalk and shows me how to draw a tree in 
three sweeping lines. He doesn't care how many mistakes I 
make, just one-two-three, "like a waltz," he says. Over and 
over. I use up a mile of the paper, but he doesn't care. This 
may be the root of his budget problem with the school board. 

God crackles over the intercom and tells Mr. Freeman he's late 
for a faculty meeting. Mr. Freeman says the kind of words you 
don't usually hear from teachers. He gives me a new piece of 
chalk and tells me to draw roots. You can't grow a decent tree 
without roots. 

The art room is one of the places I feel safe. I hum and don't 
worry about looking stupid. Roots. Ugh. But I try. One-two- 
three, one-two-three. I don't worry about the next day or 
minute. One-two-three. 

Somebody flicks the lights off. My head snaps up. IT is there. 
Andy Beast. Little rabbit heart leaps out of my chest and 
scampers across the paper, leaving bloody footprints on my 
roots. He turns the lights back on. 

I smell him. Have to find out where he gets that cologne. I 
think it's called Fear. This is turning into one of those repeat- 
ing nightmares where you keep falling but never hit the floor. 
Only I feel like I just smacked into the ground at a hundred 
miles an hour. 

IT: "You seen Rachelle? Rachelle Bruin?" 

I sit completely still. Maybe I can blend in with the metal ta- 
bles and crumbling clay pots. He walks toward me, long, slow 
strides. The smell chokes me. I shiver. 

IT: "She's supposed to meet me, but I can't find her anywhere. 
You know who she is?" 

Me: 

IT sits on my table, ITs leg smears my chalk drawing, blurring 
the roots into a mossy fog. 

IT: "Hello? Anyone home? Are you deaf?" 

IT stares at my face. I crush my jaws together so hard my 
teeth crumble to dust. 

I am a deer frozen in the headlights of a tractor trailer. Is he 
going to hurt me again? He couldn't, not in school. Could he? 
Why can't I scream, say something, do anything? Why am I so 
afraid? 

"Andy? I've been waiting outside." Rachel sweeps into the 
room wearing an artsy-fartsy gypsy scarf skirt and a necklace 
of eye-sized mirrors. She pouts and Andy leaps off the table, 
ripping my paper, scattering bits of chalk. Ivy walks through 
the door, bumping Rachel accidentally. She hesitates - she has 
to feel that something is going on - then she takes her sculp- 
ture off the shelf and sits at the table next to me. Rachel looks 
at me, but she doesn't say anything. She must have gotten 
my note - I mailed it over a week ago. I stand up. Rachel gives 
us a half wave and says "Ciao." Andy puts his arm around 
her waist and pulls her close to his body as they float out the 
door. 

Ivy is talking to me, but it takes a while before I can hear her. 
"What a jerk," she says. She pinches the clay. "I can't believe 
she's going out with him. Can you? It's like I don't know her 
anymore. And he's trouble." She slaps a hunk of clay on the 
table. "Believe me, that creep is trouble with a capital T." 

I'd love to stay and chat, but my feet won't let me. I walk 
home instead of taking the bus. I unlock the front door and 
walk straight up to my room, across the rug, and into my 
closet without even taking off my backpack. When I close the 
closet door behind me, I bury my face into the clothes on the 
left side of the rack, clothes that haven't fit for years. I stuff 
my mouth with old fabric and scream until there are no 
sounds left under my skin. 



HOME SICK 

It is time for a mental-health day. I need a day in pajamas, 
eating ice cream from the carton, painting my toenails, and 
enjoying TrashTV. You have to plan ahead for a mental- 
health day. I learned this from a conversation my mom 
had with her friend Kim. Mom always starts acting sick 
forty-eight hours ahead of time. She and Kim take mental- 
health days together. They buy shoes and go to the 
movies. Cutting-edge adult delinquency. What is the world 
coming to? 

I don't eat any dinner or dessert, and I cough so much during 
the news my dad tells me to take some cough medicine. In the 
morning, I smear some mascara under my eyes so it looks like 
I haven't slept at all. Mom takes my temperature - turns out I 
have a fever. Surprises even me. Her hand is cool, an island on 
my forehead. 

The words tumble out before I can stop them. 
Me: "I don't feel well." 
Mom pats my back. 

Mom: "You must be sick. You're talking." 

Even she can hear how bitchy that sounds. She clears her 
throat and tries again. 

Mom: "I'm sorry. It's nice to hear your voice. Go back to bed. 
I'll bring up a tray before I leave. Do you want some ginger 
ale?" 

I nod. 



OPRAH, SALLY JESSY, JERRY, AND ME 



My fever is 102.2. Sounds like a radio station. Mom calls to 
remind me to drink a lot of fluids. I say "Thank you," even 
though it hurts my throat. It's nice of her to call me. She 
promises to bring home Popsicles. I hang up and snuggle into 
my couch nest with the remote. Click. Click. Click. 

If my life were a TV show, what would it be? If it were an 
After-School Special, I would speak in front of an auditorium 
of my peers on How Not to Lose Your Virginity. Or, Why Se- 
niors Should Be Locked Up. Or, My Summer Vacation: A 
Drunken Party, Lies, and Rape. 

Was I raped? 

Oprah: "Let's explore that. You said no. He covered your 
mouth with his hand. You were thirteen years old. It doesn't 
matter that you were drunk. Honey, you were raped. What a 
horrible, horrible thing for you to live though. Didn't you ever 
think of telling anyone? You can't keep this inside forever. Can 
someone get her a tissue?" 

Sally Jessy: "I want this boy held responsible. He is to blame 
for this attack. You do know it was an attack, don't you? 
It was not your fault. I want you to listen to me, listen to 
me, listen to me. It was not your fault. This boy was an 
animal." 

Jerry: "Was it love? No. Was it lust? No. Was it tenderness, 
sweetness, the First Time they talk about in magazines? No, no, 
no, no, no! Speak up, Meatilda, ah, Melinda, I can't hear you!" 

My head is killing me, my throat is killing me, my stomach 
bubbles with toxic waste. I just want to sleep. A coma would 
be nice. Or amnesia. Anything, just to get rid of this, these 
thoughts, whispers in my mind. Did he rape my head, too? 

I take two Tylenol and eat a bowl of pudding. Then I watch 
Mister Rogers' Neighborhood and fall asleep. A trip to the 
Neighborhood of Make-Believe would be nice. Maybe I could 
stay with Daniel Striped Tiger in his tree house. 



REAL SPRING 

May is finally here and it has stopped raining. Good thing, 
too - the mayor of Syracuse was about to put out a call for a 
guy named Noah. The sun appears butter-yellow and so warm 
it coaxes tulips out of the crusty mud. A miracle. 

Our yard is a mess. All our neighbors have these great maga- 
zine-cover yards with flowers that match their shutters and 
expensive white rocks that border fresh mounds of mulch. 
Ours has green bushes that just about cover the front win- 
dows, and lots of dead leaves. 

Mom is already gone. Saturday is the biggest selling day of the 
week at Effert's. Dad snores upstairs. I put on old jeans and 
unearth a rake from the back of the garage. I start on the 
leaves suffocating the bushes. I bet Dad hasn't cleaned them 
out for years. They look harmless and dry on top, but under 
that top layer they're wet and slimy. White mold snakes from 
one leaf to the next. The leaves stick together like floppy pages 
in a decomposing book. I rake a mountain into the front yard 
and there are still more, like the earth pukes up leaf gunk 
when I'm not looking. I have to fight the bushes. They snag 
the tines of the rake and hold them - they don't like me clean- 
ing out all that rot. 

It takes an hour. Finally, the rake scrapes its metal fingernails 
along damp brown dirt. I get down on my knees to reach be- 
hind and drag out the last leaves. Ms. Keen would be proud of 
me. I observe. Worms caught in the sun squirm for cover. Pale 
green shoots of something alive have been struggling under 
the leaves. As I watch, they straighten to face the sun. I swear 
I can see them grow. 

The garage door opens and Dad backs out the Jeep. He stops 
in the driveway when he sees me. He turns off the engine and 
gets out. I stand up and brush the dirt off my jeans. My palms 
are blistered and my arms are already sore from the raking. I 
can't tell if he's angry or not. Maybe he likes the front of his 
house looking like crap. 

Dad: "That's a lot of work." 

Me: 

Dad: "I'll get some leaf bags at the store." 

Me: 



We both stand there with our arms crossed, staring at the lit- 
tle baby plants trying to grow in the shade of the house-eating 
bushes. The sun goes behind a cloud and I shiver. I should 
have worn a sweatshirt. The wind rustles dead leaves still 
clinging to the oak branches by the street. All I can think of is 
that the rest of the leaves are going to drop and I'll have to 
keep raking. 

Dad: "Looks a lot better. Cleaned out like that, I mean." 
The wind blows again. The leaves tremble. 

Dad: "I suppose I should trim back the bushes. Of course, 
then you'd see the shutters and they need paint. And if I paint 
these shutters, I'll have to paint all the shutters, and the trim 
needs work, too. And the front door." 

Me: 

Tree: "Hush rustle chitachita shhhh ..." 

Dad turns to listen to the tree. I'm not sure what to do. 

Dad: "And that tree is sick. See how the branches on the left 
don't have any buds? I should call someone to take a look at 
it. Don't want it crashing into your room during a storm." 

Thanks, Dad. Like I'm not already having a hard time sleep- 
ing. Worry #64: flying tree limbs. I shouldn't have raked any- 
thing. Look what I started. I shouldn't have tried something 
new. I should have stayed in the house. Watched cartoons 
with a double-sized bowl of Cheerios. Should have stayed in 
my room. Stayed in my head. 

Dad: "I guess I'm going to the hardware store. Want to 
come?" 

The hardware store. Seven acres of unshaven men and bright- 
eyed women in search of the perfect screwdriver, weed killer, 
volcanic gas grills. Noise. Lights. Kids running down the aisle 
with hatchets and axes and saw blades. People fighting about 
the right color to paint the bathroom. No thank you. 

I shake my head. I pick up the rake and start making the 
dead-leaf pile neater. A blister pops and stains the rake handle 
like a tear. Dad nods and walks to the Jeep, keys jangling in 
his fingers. A mockingbird lands on a low oak branch and 
scolds me. I rake the leaves out of my throat. 

Me: "Can you buy some seeds? Flower seeds?" 



FAULT! 

Our gym teacher, Ms. Connors, is teaching us to play tennis. 
Tennis is the only sport that comes close to not being a total 
waste of time. Basketball would be great if all you had to do 
was shoot foul shots, but most of the time you're on the court 
with nine other people bumping and shoving and running way 
too much. Tennis is more civilized. Only two people have to 
play, unless you play doubles, which I would never do. The 
rules are simple, you get to catch your breath every few min- 
utes, and you can work on your tan. 

I actually learned to play a couple of summers ago when my 
parents had a trial membership at a fitness club. Mom signed 
me up for lessons and I played with Dad a few times before 
they figured the monthly dues were too expensive. Since I'm 
not a total spaz with the racket, Ms. Connors pairs me off 
with Jock Goddess Nicole to demonstrate the game to the rest 
of the class. 

I serve first, a nice shot with a little speed on it. Nicole hits it 
right back to me with a great backhand. We volley a bit back 
and forth. Then Ms. Connors blows her whistle to stop and 
explain the retarded scoring system in tennis where the num- 
bers don't make sense and love doesn't count for anything. 

Nicole serves next. She aces it, a perfect serve at about ninety 
miles an hour that kisses the court just inside the line before I can 
move. Ms. Connors tells Nicole she's awesome and Nicole smiles. 

I do not smile. 

I'm ready for her second serve and I hit it right back down her 
throat. Ms. Connors says something nice to me and Nicole 
adjusts the strings on her racket. My serve. 

I bounce the ball a few times. Nicole bounces on the balls of 
her feet. She isn't fooling around anymore. Her pride is at 
stake, her womynhood. She is not about to be beat by some 
weirdo hushquiet delinquent who used to be her friend. Ms. 
Connors tells me to hit the ball. 

I slam into the ball, sending it right to Nicole's mouth, grin- 
ning behind her custom purple mouth guard. She twists out of 
the way. 

Ms. Connors: "Fault!" Giggles from the class. 

A foot fault. Wrong foot forward, toe over the line. I get a sec- 
ond chance. Another civilized aspect of tennis. 

I bounce the yellow ball, one two three. Up in the air like re- 
leasing a bird or an apple, then arcing my arm, rotate shoul- 
der, bring down the power and the anger and don't forget to 
aim. My racket takes on a life of its own, a bolt of energy. It 
crashes down on the ball, bulleting it over the net. The ball 
explodes on the court, leaving a crater before Nicole can 
blink. It blows past her and hits the fence so hard it rattles. 
No one laughs. 

No fault. I score a point. Nicole wins eventually, but not by 
much. Everybody else whines about their blisters. I have cal- 
luses on my hands from yard work. I'm tough enough to play 
and strong enough to win. Maybe I can get Dad to practice 
with me a few times. It would be the only glory of a really 
sucky year if I could beat someone at something. 


YEARBOOKS 



The yearbooks have arrived. Everyone seems to understand 
this ritual but me. You hunt down every person who looks 
vaguely familiar and get them to write in your yearbook that 
the two of you are best friends and you'll never forget each 

other and remember class (fill in the blank) and have 

a great summer. Stay sweet. 

I watch some kids ask the cafeteria ladies to sign their books. 
What do they write: "Hope your chicken patties never 
bleed?" Or, maybe, "May your Jell-O always wiggle?" 

The cheerleaders have obtained some sort of special exemption 
to roam the hall in a pack with pens in hand to seek out auto- 
graphs of staff and students. I catch a whiff of competitive 
juices when they float past me. They are counting signatures. 

The appearance of the yearbook clears up another high school 
mystery - why all the popular girls put up with the disgusting 
habits of Todd Ryder. He is a pig. Greasy, sleazy, foul-mouthed, 
and unwashed, he'll make a great addition to a state college fra- 
ternity. But the popular kids kissed up to him all year. Why? 

Todd Ryder is the yearbook photographer. 

Flip through the pages and see who is in his favor. Be nice to 
Todd and he'll take pictures of you that should have a model- 
ing agency calling your house any day now. Snub Todd and 
you'll look like a trailer-park refugee having a bad hair day. 

If I ran a high school, I would include stuff like this in the 
first-day indoctrination. I hadn't understood the Power of 
Todd. He snapped one picture of me, walking away from the 
camera wearing my dumpy winter coat, my shoulders up 
around my ears. 

I will not be buying a yearbook. 



HAIRWOMAN NO MORE 

Hairwoman got a buzz cut. Her hair is half an inch long, a 
new crop of head fur, short and spiky. It's black - no fake or- 
ange at all. And she got new glasses, purple-rimmed bifocals 
that hang from a beaded chain. 

I don't know what caused this. Has she fallen in love? Did she 
get a divorce? Move out of her parents' basement? You never 
think about teachers having parents, but they must. 

Some kids say she did it to confuse us while we are working 
on our final essay. I'm not sure. We have a choice. We can 
write about "Symbolism in the Comics" or "How Story 
Changed My Life." I think something else is going on. I'm 
thinking she found a good shrink, or maybe she published 
that novel she's been writing since the earth cooled. I wonder 
if she'll be teaching summer school. 



LITTLE WRITING ON THE WALL 



Ivy is sitting at my art table with four uncapped colored markers 
sticking out of her bun. I stand up, she turns her head, and 
bingo - I've got a rainbow on my shirt. She apologizes a hundred 
million times. If it were anyone else, I would figure they did it on 
purpose. But Ivy and me have sort of been friendly the last few 
weeks. I don't think she was trying to be mean. 

Mr. Freeman lets me go to the bathroom, where I try to scrub the 
stains. I must look like a dog chasing its tail, twisting and twirling, 
trying to see the stains on my back in the mirror. The door swings 
open. It's Ivy. I raise my hand as she opens her mouth. "Don't say 
it anymore. I know you're sorry. It was an accident." 

She points to the pens still stuck in her bun. "I put the caps 
on. Mr. Freeman made me. Then he sent me in here to see 
how you're doing." 

"He's worried about me?" 

"He wants to make sure you don't pull a disappearing act. 
You have been known to wander off." 

"Not in the middle of class." 

"There's a first time for everything. Go in the stall and hand 
over your shirt. You can't wash it while you're wearing it." 

I think Principal Principal should have his office in the 
rest room. Maybe then he'd hire somebody to keep it clean, or 
an armed guard to stop people from plugging up the toilet, 
smoking, or writing on the walls. 

"Who is Alexandra?" I ask. 

"I don't know any Alexandras," Ivy's voice says above the 
rush of water in the sink. "There might be an Alexandra in 
tenth grade. Why?" 

"According to this, she has pissed off a whole bunch of 
people. One person wrote in huge letters that she's a whore, 
and all these others added on little details. She slept with 
this guy, she slept with that guy, she slept with those guys 
all at the same time. For a tenth-grader, she sure gets 
around." 

Ivy doesn't answer. I peer through the crack between the door 
and the wall. She opens the soap container and dips my shirt 
in it. Then she scrubs the stains. I shiver. I'm standing in a bra, 
not a terribly clean bra, and it is freezing in here. Ivy holds the 
shirt up to the light, frowns, and scrubs some more. I want to 
take a deep breath, but it smells too bad. 

"Remember what you said about Andy Evans being big 
trouble?" 

"Yeah." 

"Why did you say that?" 


She rinses the soap from the shirt. "He has such a reputation. 
He's only after one thing, and if you believe the rumors, he'll 
get it, no matter what." She wrings the water out of the shirt. 
The sound of dripping water echoes off the tiles. 

"Rachel is going out with him," I say. 

"I know. Just add that to the list of stupid things she's done 
this year. What does she say about him?" 

"We don't really talk," I say. 

"She's a bitch, that's what you mean. She thinks she's too 
good for the rest of us." 

Ivy punches the silver button on the hand dryer and holds up 
the shirt. I reread the graffiti. "I luv Derek." "Mr. Neck bites." 
"I hate this place." "Syracuse rocks." "Syracuse sucks." Lists 
of hotties, lists of jerks, list of ski resorts in Colorado everyone 
dreams about. Phone numbers that have been scratched out 
with keys. Entire conversations scroll down the bathroom stall. 
It's like a community chat room, a metal newspaper. 

I ask Ivy to hand over one of her pens. She does. "I think 
you're going to have to bleach this thing," she says and hands 
over the shirt as well. I pull it over my head. It's still damp. 
"What did you want the marker for?" 

I hold the cap in my teeth. I start another subject thread on 
the wall: Guys to Stay Away From. The first entry is the Beast 
himself: Andy Evans. 

I swing open the door with a flourish. "Ta-da!" I point to my 
handiwork. 

Ivy grins. 



PROM PREPARATION 

The climax of mating season is nearly upon us - the Senior 
Prom. They should cancel school this week. The only things 
we're learning are who is going with who (whom? must ask 
Hairwoman), who bought a dress in Manhattan, which limo 
company won't tell if you drink, the most expensive tux place, 
and on and on and on. The gossip energy alone could power 
the building's electricity for the rest of the marking period. 
The teachers are pissed. Kids aren't handing in homework be- 
cause they have appointments at the tanning salon. 

Andy Beast asked Rachel to go with him. I can't believe her 
mother is letting her go, but maybe she agreed because they're 
going to double with Rachel's brother and his date. Rachel is 
one of the rare ninth-graders invited to the Senior Prom; her 
social stock has soared. She must not have gotten my note, or 
maybe she decided to ignore it. Maybe she showed it to Andy 
and they had a good laugh. Maybe she won't get in the trou- 
ble I did, maybe he'll listen to her. Maybe I had better stop 
thinking about it before I go nuts. 

Heather has come bellycrawling for help. My mother can't be- 
lieve it: a living, breathing friend on the front porch for her 
maladjusted daughter! I pry Heather out of Mom's claws and 
we retreat to my room. My stuffed rabbits crawl out of their 
burrows, noses awiggling, pink bunny, purple bunny, a ging- 
ham bunny from my grandma. They are as excited as my 
mother. Company! I can see the room through Heather's 
green-tinted contacts. She doesn't say anything, but I know 
she thinks it looks stupid - a baby room, all those toy rabbits; 
there must be a hundred of them. Mom knocks on the door. 
She has cookies for us. I want to ask if she's feeling sick. I 
hand the bag to Heather. She takes one cookie and nibbles at 
its edges. I snarf five, just to spite her. I lie on my bed, trapping 
the bunnies next to the wall. Heather delicately pushes a pile 
of dirty clothes off my chair and perches her skinny butt on it. 
I wait. 

She launches into a sob story about how much she hates 
being a Marthadrone. Indentured servitude would be bet- 
ter. They are just taking advantage of her, bossing her 
around. Her grades are all the way down to Bs because of 
the time she has to spend waiting on her Senior Marthas. 
Her father is thinking about taking a job in Dallas and 
she wouldn't mind moving again, nope not one bit, be- 
cause she's heard kids in the South aren't as stuck-up as they 
are here. 

I eat more cookies. I'm fighting the shock of having a guest in 
my room. I almost kick her out because it's going to hurt too 
much when my room is empty again. Heather says I was 
smart, "... so smart, Mel, to blow off this stupid group. This 
whole year has been horrible - I hated every single day, but I 
didn't have the guts to get out like you did." 

She completely ignores the fact that I was never in, and that 
she dumped me, banished me from even the shadows of 
Martha glory. I feel like any minute a guy in a lavender suit 
will burst into the room with a microphone and bellow, "An- 
other alternate-reality moment brought to you by Adoles- 
cence!" 

I still can't figure out why she's here. She licks a crumb off her 
cookie and gets to the point. She and the other Junior Marthas 
are required to decorate the Route 1 1 Holiday Inn ballroom 
for the prom. Meg 'n' Emily 'n' Siobhan can't assist, of 
course; they have to get their nails painted and their teeth 
whitened. The privileged, the few, the Junior Marthas have 
been laid waste by mononucleosis, leaving Heather all by her- 
self. She is desperate. 

Me: "You have to decorate the whole thing? By Saturday 
night?" 

Heather: "Actually, we can't start until three o'clock Saturday 
afternoon because of some stupid meeting of Chrysler sales- 
men. But I know we can do it. I'm asking other kids, too. Do 
you know anyone who could help?" 

Frankly, no I don't, but I chew and try to look thoughtful. 
Heather takes this to mean that yes, I'd be happy to help her. 
She bounces out of the chair. 

Heather: "I knew you would help. You're great. Tell you 
what. I owe you, I owe you a big one. How about next week 
I come over and help you redecorate?" 

Me: 



Heather: "Didn't you tell me once how much you hated yom 
room? Well, now I see why. It would be so depressing just to 
wake up here every morning. We'll clear out all this junk." 
She kicks a chenille bunny who was sleeping in my robe on 
the floor. "And get rid of those curtains. Maybe you could go 
shopping with me - can you get your mom's American Ex- 
press?" She yanks my curtains to one side. "Let's not forget to 
wash those windows. Sea-foam green and sage, that's what 
you should look for, classic and feminine." 

Me: "No." 

Heather: "You want something richer, like an eggplant, or 
cobalt?" 

Me: "No, I haven't decided on colors yet. That's not what I 
mean, I mean no, I won't help you." 

She collapses into the chair again. "You have to help me." 
Me: "No, I don't." 
Heather: "But, whiii - iiiiy?" 

I bite my lip. Does she want to know the truth, that she's self- 
centered and cold? That I hope all the seniors yell at her? That 
I hate sea-foam green, and besides, it's none of her business if 
my windows are dirty? I feel tiny button noses against my 
back. Bunnies say to be kind. Lie. 

Me: "I have plans. The tree guy is coming to work on the oak 
out front, I have to dig in my garden, and besides, I know 
what I want to do in here and it doesn't include eggplant." 

Most of it is half true, half planned. Heather scowls. I open 
the dirty window to let in fresh air. It brushes my hair back off 
my face. I tell Heather she has to leave. I need to clean. She 
crams her cookie in her mouth and does not say goodbye to 
my mother. What a snot. 



COMMUNICATION 101 

I'm on a roll. I'm rocking. I don't know what it is; standing up 
to Heather, planting marigold seeds, or maybe the look on 
Mom's face when I asked if she would let me redecorate my 
room. The time has come to arm-wrestle some demons. Too 
much sun after a Syracuse winter does strange things to your 
head, makes you feel strong, even if you aren't. 

I must talk to Rachel. I can't do it in algebra, and the Beast 
waits for her outside English. But we have study hall at the 
same time. Bingo. I find her squinting at a book with small 
type in the library. She's too vain for glasses. I instruct my 
heart not to bolt down the hall, and sit next to her. No nu- 
clear bombs detonate. A good start. 

She looks at me without expression. I try on a smile, sizi; 
medium. "Hey," I say. "Hmm," she responds. No lip curling, 
no rude hand gestures. So far, so good. I look at the book 
she's copying (word for word) from. It's about France. 

Me: "Homework?" 



Rachel: "Kind of." She taps her pencil on the table. "I'm go- 
ing to France this summer with the International Club. We 
have to do a report to prove we're serious." 

Me: "That's great. I mean, you've always talked about travel- 
ing, ever since we were kids. Remember when we were in 
fourth grade and we read Heidi and we tried to melt cheese in 
vour fireplace?" 

We laugh a little too loudly. It's not really that funny, 
but we're both nervous. A librarian points his finger at us. 
Bad students, bad bad students. No laughing. I look at her 
notes. They are lousy, a few facts about Paris decorated with 
an Eiffel Tower doodle, hearts, and the initials R.B. + A.E. 
Gack. 

Me: "So, you're really going out with him. With Andy. I heard 
about the prom." 

Rachel grins honey-slow. She stretches, like the mention of his 
name wakes her muscles and makes her tummy jump. "He's 
great," she says. "He is just so awesome, and gorgeous, and 
yummy." She stops. She is talking to the village leper. 

Me: "What are you going to do when he goes to college?" 

Argh, an arrow to her soft spot. Clouds across the sun. "I 
can't think about that. It hurts too much. He said he was go- 
ing to get his parents to let him transfer back here. He could 
go to La Salle or Syracuse. I'll wait for him." 

Give me a break. 

Me: "You've been going out for, like, what - two weeks? 
Three?" 

A cold front blows across the library. She straightens up an 
snaps shut the cover of her notebook. 

Rachel: "What do you want, anyway?" 

Before I can answer, the librarian pounces. We are welcome to 
continue our conversation in the principal's office, or we can 
stay and be quiet. Our choice. I take out my notebook and 
write to Rachel. 

It's nice to talk to you again. I'm sorry we couldn't be friends 
this year. I pass the notebook to her. She melts a bit around 
the edges and writes back. 

Yeah, I know. So, who do you like? 

No one, really. My lab partner is kinda nice, but like a friend- 
friend, not a boyfriend or anything. 

Rachel nods wisely. She's dating a senior. She is so beyond 
these freshman "friend-friend" relationships. She's in charge 
again. Time for me to suck up. 

Are you still mad at me? I write. 

She doodles a quick lightning bolt. 

No, I guess not. It was a long time ago. She stops and drawl 
a spiraling circle. I stand on the edge and wonder if I'm g I 
to fall in. The party was a little wild, she continues. But it wtU 
dumb to call the cops. We could have just left. She slides t h e 
notebook over to me. 

I draw a spiraling circle in the opposite direction to Rachel's. I 
could leave it like this, stop in the middle of the highway. She's 
talking to me again. All I have to do is keep the dirt hidden 
and walk arm in arm with her into the sunset. She reaches 
back to fix her hair scrunchie. "R.B. + A.E." is written in red 
pen on the inside of her forearm. Breathe in, one-two-three. 
Breathe out, one-two-three. I force my hand to relax. 

/ didn't call the cops to break up the party, I write. / called - I 
put the pencil down. I pick it up again - them because some 
guy raped me. Under the trees. I didn't know what to do. She 
watches as I carve out the words. She leans closer to me. I 
write more. / was stupid and drunk and I didn't know what 
was happening and then he hurt - I scribble that out - raped 
me. When the police came, everyone was screaming, and I 
was just too scared, so I cut through some back yards and 
walked home. 

I push the notebook back to her. She stares at the words. She 
pulls her chair around to my side of the table. 

Oh my God, I am so sorry, she writes. Why didn't you tell 
me? 

I couldn't tell anybody. 

Does your mom know? 

I shake my head. Tears pop up from some hidden spring. 
Damn. I sniff and wipe my eyes on my sleeve. 

Did you get pregnant? Did he have a disease? Oh my God, 
Are you OK????????? 

No. I don't think so. Yes, I'm OK. Well, kinda. 
Rachel writes in a heavy, fast hand. WHO DID IT??? 
I turn the page. 
Andy Evans. 

"Liar!" She stumbles out of her chair and grabs her books off 
the table. "I can't believe you. You're jealous. You're a twisted 
little freak and you're jealous that I'm popular and I'm going 
to the prom and so you lie to me like this. And you sent me 
that note, didn't you? You are so sick." 

She spins to take on the librarian. "I'm going to the nurse," 
she states. "I think I'm going to throw up." 



CHAT ROOM 

I'm standing in the lobby, looking at the buses. I don't want to 
go home. I don't want to stay here. I got my hopes up halfway 
through the conversation with Rachel - that was my mistake. 
It was like smelling the perfect Christmas feast and having the 
door slammed in your face, leaving you alone in the cold. 

"Melinda." I hear my name. Great. Now I'm hearing things. 
Maybe I should ask the guidance counselor for a therapist or 
a nosy shrink. I don't say anything and I feel awful. I tell 
somebody and I feel worse. I'm having trouble finding a mid- 
dle ground. 

Someone touches my arm gently. "Melinda?" It's Ivy. "Can you 
take the late bus? I want to show you something." We walk to- 
gether. She leads me to the bathroom, the one where she washed 
my shirt, which, by the way, still has traces of her markers, even 
.ifter the bleach. She points to the stall. "Take a look." 

GUYS TO STAY AWAY FROM 

Andy Evans 
He's a creep. 
He's a bastard. 

Stay away ! ! !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!! 
He should be locked up. 
He thinks he's all that. 
Call the cops. 

What's the name of that drug they give perverts so they can't 
get it up? 

Diprosomething. 

He should get it every morning in his orange juice. I went out 
with him to the movies - he tried to get his hands down my 
pants during the PREVIEWS ! ! 

There's more. Different pens, different handwriting, conversa- 
tions between some writers, arrows to longer paragraphs. It's 
better than taking out a billboard. 

I feel like I can fly. 



PRUNING 

I wake the next morning, Saturday, to the sound of a chain 
saw, the noise biting right through my ears and splintering my 
plans of sleeping in. I peer out the window. The arborists, the 
tree guys Dad called to trim the oak's dead branches, stand at 
the base of the tree, one guy revving up the chain saw like it's 
a sports car, the other giving the tree the once-over. I go down- 
stairs for breakfast. 

Watching cartoons is out of the question. I make a cup of tea 
and join Dad and a group of neighborhood kids watching the 
show from the driveway. One arborist monkeys his way into 
the pale green canopy, then hauls up the chain saw (turned 
off) at the end of a thick rope. He sets to work pruning the 
deadwood like a sculptor. "Brrrrr-rrrrowww." The chain saw 
gnaws through the oak, branches crashing to the ground. 

The air swirls with sawdust. Sap oozes from the open sores on 
the trunk. He is killing the tree. He'll only leave a stump. The 
tree is dying. There's nothing to do or say. We watch in silence 
as the tree crashes piece by piece to the damp ground. 

The chain-saw murderer swings down with a grin. He doesn't 
even care. A little kid asks my father why that man is chop- 
ping down the tree. 

Dad: "He's not chopping it down. He's saving it. Those 
branches were long dead from disease. All plants are like that. 
By cutting off the damage, you make it possible for the tree to 
grow again. You watch - by the end of summer, this tree will 
be the strongest on the block." 

I hate it when my father pretends to know more than he does. 
He sells insurance. He is not a forest ranger, wise in the way 
of the woods. The arborist fires up the mulcher at the back of 
their truck. I've seen enough. I grab my bike and take off. 

The first stop is the gas station, to pump up my tires. I can't 
remember the last time I rode. The morning is warm, a lazy, 
slow Saturday. The parking lot at the grocery store is full. A 
couple of Softball games are being played behind the elemen- 
tary school, but I don't stop to watch. I ride up the hill past 
Rachel's house, past the high school. The down side is a fast, 
easy coast. I dare myself to lift my hands off the handlebars. 

As long as I'm moving fast enough, the front wheel holds 
steady. I turn left and left again, following the hills down 
without realizing where I'm heading. 

Some part of me has planned this, a devious internal compass 
pointed to the past. The lane isn't familiar until I glimpse the 
barn. I squeeze the brakes hard and struggle to control the 
bike on the gravel shoulder. A wind rips through the phone 
wires overhead. A squirrel fights to retain her balance. 

There are no cars in the driveway. "Rodgers" is painted on the 
mailbox. A basketball hoop hangs off the side of the barn. I 
don't remember that, but it would have been hard to see it in; 
the dark. I walk my bike along the back edge of the property 
to where the trees swallow the sun. My bike leans into a col- 
lapsing fence. I sink to the shade-cold ground. 

My heart thuds as if I were still pedaling up the hill. My hands 
shake. It is a completely normal place, out of sight of the barn 
and house, close enough to the road that I can hear cars pass- 
ing. Fragments of acorn shells litter the ground. You could 
bring a kindergarten class here for a picnic. 

I think about lying down. No, that would not do. I crouch by 
the trunk, my fingers stroking the bark, seeking a Braille code, 
a clue, a message on how to come back to life after my long 
undersnow dormancy. I have survived. I am here. Confused, 
screwed up, but here. So, how can I find my way? Is there a 
chain saw of the soul, an ax I can take to my memories or 
fears? I dig my fingers into the dirt and squeeze. A small, clean 
part of me waits to warm and burst through the surface. Some 
quiet Melindagirl I haven't seen in months. That is the seed I 
will care for. 



PROWLING 

When I get home, it's time for lunch. I make two egg-salad 
sandwiches and drink an enormous glass of milk. I eat an ap- 
ple and put my dishes in the dishwasher. It's only one o'clock. 
I suppose I should clean the kitchen and vacuum, but the win- 
dows are open and robins sing on the front lawn, where a pile 
of mulch with my name on it is waiting. 

Mom is impressed when she drives up at dinnertime. The front 
lawn is raked, edged, mowed, and the bushes are mulched. I'm 
not even breathing hard. Mom helps me carry the plastic deck 
furniture up from the basement and I scrub it with bleach. Dad 
brings home pizza and we eat on the deck. Mom and Dad 
drink iced tea and there is no biting or snarling. I clear the 
dishes and throw the pizza box in the trash. 

I lie down on the couch to watch TV, but my eyes close and 
I'm out. When I wake up, it's past midnight, and someone has 
covered me with an afghan. The house is quiet, dark. Cool 
breeze slides in between the curtains. 

I am wide awake. I feel itchy inside my skin - antsy, that's 
what my mother would call it. I can't sit still. I have to do 
something. My bike is still leaning against the pruned tree in 
the front yard. I ride. 

Up and down, across and diagonal, I pedal my sore 
legs through the streets of a suburb mostly sleeping. Some 
late-night TVs flicker from bedroom windows. A few cars 
are parked in front of the grocery store. I imagine people 
mopping the floors, restacking loaves of bread. I coast by 
the houses of people I used to know: Heather, Nicole. Turn 
the corner, downshift and pedal harder, up the hill to 
Rachel's house. The lights are on, her parents waiting for 
the fairy prom-goers to come home. I could knock on the 
door and ask them if they want to play cards or something. 
Nah. 

I ride like I have wings. I am not tired. I don't think I'll ever 
have to sleep again. 



POSTPROM 

By Monday morning, the prom is legend. The drama! The 
tears! The passion! Why hasn't anyone made a television 
show out of this yet? The total damage included one stomach 
pumped, three breakups of long-term relationships, one lost 
diamond earring, four outrageous hotel-room parties, and five 
matching tattoos allegedly decorating the behinds of the se- 
nior class officers. The guidance counselors are celebrating the 
lack of fatal accidents. 

Heather is not at school today. Everybody is griping about her 
lame decorations. I bet she calls in sick the rest of the year. 
Heather should run away and join the Marines immediately. 
They'll be much sweeter to her than a swarm of angry 
Marthas. 

Rachel is in her glory. She ditched Andy in the middle of the 
prom. I'm trying to piece the story together from grapevine 
gossip. They say she and Andy argued during a slow song. 
They say he was all over her with his hands and his mouth. 
While they danced, he was grinding against her and she 
backed off. The song ended and she swore at him. They say 
she was ready to slap him, but she didn't. He looked around, 
all innocent-like, and she stomped over to her exchange- 
student buddies. Ended up dancing the night away with a kid 
from Portugal. They say Andy's been really pissed off ever 
since. He got wicked drunk at a party and passed out in a 
bowl of bean dip. Rachel burned everything he ever gave her 
and left the ashes in front of his locker. His friends laughed at 
him. 

Except for the gossip, there is no real point in coming to 
school. Well, there are final exams, but it's not like they are 
going to make any difference to my grades. We have - what? 
Two more weeks of classes? Sometimes I think high school is 
one long hazing activity: if you are tough enough to survive 
this, they'll let you become an adult. I hope it's worth it. 



PREY 

I'm waiting for the clock to end the daily torture-by-algebra 
session when WHAMMO! - a thought slams into my head: I 
don't want to hang out in my little hidy-hole anymore. I look 
behind me, half expecting to see a sniggering back-row guy 
who beaned me with an eraser. Nope - the back row is strug- 
gling to stay awake. It was definitely an idea that hit me. I 
don't feel like hiding anymore. A breeze from the open win- 
dow blows my hair back and tickles my shoulders. This is the 
first day warm enough for a sleeveless shirt. Feels like summer. 

After class, I trail behind Rachel. Andy is waiting for her. She 
won't even look at him. The kid from Portugal is now 
Rachel's numero uno. HA! Double HA! Serves you right, you 
scum. Kids stare at Andy, but nobody stops to talk. He fol- 
lows Greta-Ingrid and Rachel down the hall. I am a few steps 
behind him. Greta-Ingrid spins around and tells Andy exactly 
what he should do to himself. Impressive. Her language skills 
have really improved this year. I'm ready to do a victory 
dance. 

I head for my closet after school. I want to take the poster of 
Maya Angelou home, and I'd like to keep some of my tree pic- 
tures and my turkey-bone sculpture. The rest of the stuff can 
stay, as long as it doesn't have my name on it. Who knows, 
some other kids may need a safe place to run to next year. 

Haven't been able to get rid of the smell. I leave the door 
cracked open a bit so I can breathe. It's hard to get the tree 
pictures off the walls without tearing them. The day is getting 
hotter and there's no circulation in here. I open the door 
wider - who's going to come by now? By this point in the 
year, teachers take off faster than students when the final bell 
rings. The only people left are a few teams scattered on the 
practice fields. 

I don't know what to do with the comforter. It's really too 
ratty to take home. I should have gone to my locker first and 
gotten my backpack - I forgot about the books that are in 
here. I fold the comforter and set it on the floor, turn out the 
light, and head out the door for my locker. Somebody slams 
into my chest and knocks me back into the closet. The light 
flicks on and the door closes. 

I am trapped with Andy Evans. 

He stares at me without talking. He is not as tall as my mem- 
ories, but is still loathsome. The lightbulb throws shadows un- 
der his eyes. He is made out of slabs of stone and gives off a 
smell that makes me afraid I'll wet my pants. He cracks his 
knuckles. His hands are enormous. 

Andy Beast: "You have a big mouth, you know it? Rachel 
blew me off at the prom, giving me some bullshit story 
about how I raped you. You know that's a lie. I never 
raped anybody. I don't have to. You wanted it just as bad as 
I did. But your feelings got hurt, so you started spreading 
lies, and now every girl in school is talking about me like I'm 
some kind of pervert. You've been spreading that bullshit 
story for weeks. What's wrong, ugly, you jealous? Can't get a 
date?" 

The words fall like nails on the floor, hard, pointed. I try to 
walk around him. He blocks my way. "Oh, no. You're not go- 
ing anywhere. You really screwed things up for me." He 
reaches behind and locks the door. Click. 

Me: 

"You are one strange bitch, know that? A freak. I can't believe 
anyone listened to you." He grabs my wrists. I try to pull 
them back and he squeezes so tight it feels like my bones are 
splintering. He pins me against the closed door. Maya An- 
gelou looks at me. She tells me to make some noise. I open my 
mouth and take a deep breath. 

Beast: "You're not going to scream. You didn't scream before. 
You liked it. You're jealous that I took out your friend and not 
you. I think I know what you want." 

His mouth is on my face. I twist my head. His lips are wet, his 
teeth knock against my cheekbone. I pull my arms again and 
he slams his body against mine. I have no legs. My heart wob- 
bles. His teeth are on my neck. The only sound I can make is 
a whimper. He fumbles to hold both my wrists in one hand. 
He wants a free hand. I remember I remember. Metal hands, 
hot knife hands. 

No. 

A sound explodes from me. 
"NNNOOO! ! !" 

I follow the sound, pushing off the wall, pushing Andy Evans 
off-balance, stumbling into the broken sink. He curses and 
turns, his fist coming, coming. An explosion in my head 
and blood in my mouth. He hit me. I scream, scream. Why 
aren't the walls falling? I'm screaming loud enough to make 
the whole school crumble. I grab for anything, my potpourri 
bowl - I throw it at him, it bounces to the floor. My 
books. He swears again. The door is locked the door is 
locked. He grabs me, pulls me away from the door, one 
hand over my mouth, one hand around my throat. He 
leans me against the sink. My fists mean nothing to him, 
little rabbit paws thumping harmlessly. His body crushes 
me. 

My fingers wave overhead, looking for a branch, a limb, 
something to hang on to. A block of wood - the base of my 
turkey-bone sculpture. I slam it against Maya's poster. I hear a 
crunch. IT doesn't hear. IT breathes like a dragon. ITs hand 
leaves my throat, attacks my body. I hit the wood against the 
poster, and the mirror under it, again. 

Shards of glass slip down the wall and into the sink. IT pulls 
away from me, puzzled. I reach in and wrap my fingers 
around a triangle of glass. I hold it to Andy Evans's neck. He 
freezes. I push just hard enough to raise one drop of blood. 
He raises his arms over his head. My hand quivers. I want to 
insert the glass all the way through his throat, I want to hear 
him scream. I look up. I see the stubble on his chin, a fleck of 
white in the corner of his mouth. His lips are paralyzed. He 
cannot speak. That's good enough. 

Me: "I said no." 

He nods. Someone is pounding on the door. I unlock it, and 
the door swings open. Nicole is there, along with the lacrosse 
team - sweaty, angry, their sticks held high. Someone peels off 
and runs for help. 



FINAL CUT 



Mr. Freeman is refusing to hand his grades in on time. They 
should have been in four days before the end of school, but he 
didn't see the sense in that. So I'm staying after school on the 
very, very last day for one last try at getting my tree right. 

Mr. Freeman is covering the grade wall with a mural. He 
hasn't touched the line with my name, but he eliminated 
everything else with a roller brush and fast-drying white paint. 
He hums as he mixes colors on his palette. He wants to paint 
a sunrise. 

Summer-vacation voices bubble through the open window. 
School is nearly over. The hall echoes with slamming lockers 
and shrieks of "I'm gonna miss you - got my number?" I turn 
up the radio. 

My tree is definitely breathing; little shallow breaths like it 
just shot up through the ground this morning. This one is not 
perfectly symmetrical. The bark is rough. I try to make it look 
as if initials had been carved in it a long time ago. One of the 
lower branches is sick. If this tree really lives someplace, that 
branch better drop soon, so it doesn't kill the whole thing. 
Roots knob out of the ground and the crown reaches for the 
sun, tall and healthy. The new growth is the best part. 

Lilac flows through the open windows with a few lazy bees. I 
carve and Mr. Freeman mixes orange and red to get the right 
shade of sunrise. Tires squeal out of the parking lot, another 
sober student farewell. I'm staring summer school in the face, 
so there's no real hurry. But I want to finish this tree. 

A couple of seniors stroll in. Mr. Freeman hugs them carefully, 
either because of the paint on him or because teachers hugging 
students can make for big trouble. I shake my bangs down in 
front of my face and watch through my hair. They chat about 
New York City, where the girls are going to college. Mr. Free- 
man writes down some phone numbers and names of restau- 
rants. He says he has plenty of friends in Manhattan and that 
they should meet for brunch some Sunday. The girls - the 
women - hop up and down and squeal, "I can't believe it's 
really happening!" One of them is Amber Cheerleader. Go 
figure. 

The seniors look my way before they leave. One girl, not the 
cheerleader, nods her head, and says, "Way to go. I hope 
you're OK." With hours left in the school year, I have sud- 
denly become popular. Thanks to the big mouths on the 
lacrosse team, everybody knew what happened before sun- 
down. Mom took me to the hospital to stitch up the cut on 
my hand. When we got home, there was a message on the ma- 
chine from Rachel. She wants me to call her. 

My tree needs something. I walk over to the desk and take a 
piece of brown paper and a finger of chalk. Mr. Freeman talks 
about art galleries and I practice birds - little dashes of color 
on paper. It's awkward with the bandage on my hand, but I 
keep trying. I draw them without thinking - flight, flight, 
feather, wing. Water drips on the paper and the birds bloom in 
the light, their feathers expanding promise. 

IT happened. There is no avoiding it, no forgetting. No run- 
ning away, or flying, or burying, or hiding. Andy Evans raped 
me in August when I was drunk and too young to know what 
was happening. It wasn't my fault. He hurt me. It wasn't my 
fault. And I'm not going to let it kill me. I can grow. 

I look at my homely sketch. It doesn't need anything. Even 
through the river in my eyes I can see that. It isn't perfect and 
that makes it just right. 

The last bell rings. Mr. Freeman comes to my table. 

Mr. Freeman: "Time's up, Melinda. Are you ready?" 

I hand over the picture. He takes it in his hands and studies it. 
I sniff again and wipe my eyes on my arm. The bruises are 
vivid, but they will fade. 

Mr. Freeman: "No crying in my studio. It ruins the supplies. 
Salt, you know, saline. Etches like acid." He sits on the stool 
next to me and hands back my tree. "You get an A+. You 
worked hard at this." He hands me the box of tissues. 
"You've been through a lot, haven't you?" 

The tears dissolve the last block of ice in my throat. I feel the 
frozen stillness melt down through the inside of me, dripping 
shards of ice that vanish in a puddle of sunlight on the stained 
floor. Words float up. 

Me: "Let me tell you about it." 


